[Amit Varma]: A common delusion that many of us suffer from is that the world as we see it is the world
[Amit Varma]: as it is.
[Amit Varma]: We look around and everything seems clear to us so we assume that everyone else sees
[Amit Varma]: what we see.
[Amit Varma]: What is obvious to us should be obvious to them as well.
[Amit Varma]: We get exasperated when it isn't so.
[Amit Varma]: And often we only look at the world through our own eyes.
[Amit Varma]: That is such a limited way to live.
[Amit Varma]: This is why I recommend reading as much as we can.
[Amit Varma]: Books allow us to enter the lives of others, to see the world in subtle new ways, to enhance
[Amit Varma]: our understanding of our own selves.
[Amit Varma]: And that's why, on the seen and the unseen, I love talking to guests about their lives.
[Amit Varma]: How they grew up, what their influences were, the texture of their days.
[Amit Varma]: People as old as me or older lived in a world that had so little of what we take for granted
[Amit Varma]: today.
[Amit Varma]: All the books and music and cinema of the world were not at our fingertips.
[Amit Varma]: We did not have the internet at our disposal.
[Amit Varma]: When we had free time, we didn't have smartphones we could look into.
[Amit Varma]: And India back then was so different.
[Amit Varma]: Look, I'm glad we have progressed as much as we have, but I sometimes feel sad that
[Amit Varma]: there are worlds that we left behind that live only in our memories.
[Amit Varma]: I like to revisit those worlds sometimes.
[Amit Varma]: Do you?
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Unknown]: Our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Varma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Mrinal Pandey, an author and journalist who is older than our republic.
[Amit Varma]: She has written many fine books, been a legend in the world of journalism, and is as sharp
[Amit Varma]: and energetic in her 70s as she describes herself as having been in her 20s.
[Amit Varma]: I have gained so much insight from reading her over the years, and I was honored that
[Amit Varma]: Mrinalji agreed to be my guest on this show.
[Amit Varma]: We recorded this episode in December, and I feel so fortunate that she trusted me enough
[Amit Varma]: to open up about her life, growing up as the daughter of the famous Shivani, and gradually
[Amit Varma]: making her mark in the literary world and in media.
[Amit Varma]: There were so many subjects I wanted to talk to her about, our society, our languages,
[Amit Varma]: gender, politics, our media, and the three hours went by in a flash.
[Amit Varma]: I was so inspired by this conversation, and I know that you'll also like it.
[Amit Varma]: But let's take a quick commercial break before we begin.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more?
[Amit Varma]: I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading habit.
[Amit Varma]: This means that I read more books, but I also read more long-form articles and essays.
[Amit Varma]: There's a world of knowledge available through the internet.
[Amit Varma]: But the problem we all face is, how do we navigate this knowledge?
[Amit Varma]: How do we know what to read?
[Amit Varma]: How do we put the right incentives in place?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I discovered one way.
[Amit Varma]: A couple of friends of mine run this awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com,
[Amit Varma]: which aims to help people up-level themselves by reading more.
[Amit Varma]: A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called The Daily Reader.
[Amit Varma]: Every day for six months, they sent me a long-form article to read.
[Amit Varma]: The subjects covered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade.
[Amit Varma]: This helped me build a habit of reading.
[Amit Varma]: At the end of every day, I understood the world a little better than I did before.
[Amit Varma]: So if you want to build your reading habit, head on over to CTQ Compounds and check out
[Amit Varma]: their Daily Reader.
[Amit Varma]: New batches start every month.
[Amit Varma]: They also have a great program called Future Stack, which helps you stay up-to-date with
[Amit Varma]: ideas, skills, and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future.
[Amit Varma]: Future Stack batches start every Saturday.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2,500 rupees, 2,500 if you use the discount
[Amit Varma]: code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to ctqcompounds at ctqcompounds.com and use the code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: Uplevel yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Mrinalji, welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Unknown]: It's such a pleasure to be chatting with you.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, before we start, there are many subjects I want to talk to you about today.
[Amit Varma]: But before we start, I'm really curious to know about your childhood, where were you
[Amit Varma]: born, where did you grow up?
[Amit Varma]: Because one of the things I've been realizing as I speak to guests of different ages and
[Amit Varma]: different origins in terms of where they come from, what language they speak.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things I've realized is that I am myself learning a lot about our country
[Amit Varma]: and about our culture by looking at these snapshots from different places and times
[Amit Varma]: and languages.
[Amit Varma]: And I find that such a rich experience.
[Amit Varma]: So I'd love you to, you know, start by talking about, you know, where were you born?
[Amit Varma]: What were your early years like?
[Guest]: My birth and early upbringing are as strange as my writing.
[Guest]: I was born in Tikamgarh in Orchha Palace.
[Guest]: My mamu, my mother's older brother, with whom my nani also lived, was the Home Minister
[Guest]: in the, this was 1946, a year before independence.
[Guest]: And my mother came home for the birth of her firstborn, which was me.
[Guest]: So I was born in Tikamgarh, and then soon we moved to the hills.
[Guest]: In between my first memory is, it has to be somewhere around 1947, because we were visiting
[Guest]: my father's older brother, our uncle used to live in Delhi at that time, and his house
[Guest]: was a two-story house, and there was a long corridor connecting the house to the door
[Guest]: with iron railings on both sides.
[Guest]: And I remember my cousin and my older sister and myself, my older sister was my stepsister.
[Guest]: She and the three of us, we used to stand in that and watch the crowds go down below
[Guest]: on the road.
[Guest]: And I remember for the first time that a lot of people, covered in dust, were carrying
[Guest]: their luggage on donkeys and passing through the bags.
[Guest]: I had never seen the world, so children accept things as they are.
[Guest]: And my source of information and authority was my older sister.
[Guest]: So I asked her, Binnu, what is this?
[Guest]: She said, this is a refugee.
[Guest]: So then all three of us jumped up and down and said, refugee, they were refugees.
[Guest]: They were coming in after the partition.
[Guest]: These were the famous refugees who thronged to Delhi and crowded up Delhi streets.
[Guest]: And that was all.
[Guest]: Before that and after that, I remember nothing.
[Guest]: Then I woke up in Nainital, where my father was a chemistry teacher in a school, in a
[Guest]: private school.
[Guest]: And we lived in a very beautiful cottage on top of a hill where the school, it was a residential
[Guest]: school.
[Guest]: One of my father's students was the then President Rajan Prasad's grandson, who had sent his
[Guest]: grandson to the school because he believed in Indian kind of education and not the kind
[Guest]: of Jesuit education, which was generally available in Nainital.
[Guest]: So this boy was not at all noticed in school.
[Guest]: His parents, my mother said, never visited.
[Guest]: Grandfather once came as a guest, a state guest to visit Nainital, but there was absolutely
[Guest]: no interference, no fuss surrounding this little child.
[Guest]: He went through school.
[Guest]: My father taught him chemistry and my father once said when he was being naughty in class,
[Guest]: he pulled his ear to punish him.
[Guest]: And my mother said, did you pull the ear of the President's grandson?
[Guest]: So my father said, if someone's grandson misbehaves, I will pull his ear.
[Guest]: And that was that.
[Guest]: And my mother mumbled something about, you know, not being good, not being good, but
[Guest]: nothing happened that I can recall.
[Guest]: And so we spent some years in Nainital.
[Guest]: In between, my mother's family used to come to nearby Almora for summers.
[Guest]: So I remember taking a bus with my mother and older sister, father, of course, stayed
[Guest]: back and going on the winding roads to Almora, which was not too far, but seemed like another
[Guest]: country for us.
[Guest]: And once we were getting married to an aunt, and I was running a slight temperature and
[Guest]: had a cold.
[Guest]: And my father said, don't take her.
[Guest]: And my mother said, my sister's getting married, I have to go.
[Guest]: So I was taken along.
[Guest]: And so my father gave me a red plastic purse when we were leaving, and it had throat lozenges.
[Guest]: And he said, if your throat hurts, keep eating this.
[Guest]: So that was that.
[Guest]: And I reached the wedding house.
[Guest]: And the next morning I woke up and it was discovered that I had measles.
[Guest]: So I was isolated.
[Guest]: But isolation in those days in Indian families meant that you just had a room to yourself,
[Guest]: and you lay in bed and you heard.
[Guest]: And then every five minutes, my sister and brood of cousins would come to the door and
[Guest]: tell me.
[Guest]: And I was not allowed to get out of my room, but they smuggled all kinds of foods and sweets
[Guest]: for me into my sickbed.
[Guest]: So that was the measles thing.
[Guest]: And so I spent the, I think almost the entire wedding part isolated.
[Guest]: And I was let out very briefly when my mausi was being sent off.
[Guest]: Toh upar ki khidki mein mujhko khada kar diya gaya, kaha ki dekh lo mausi jaa rahi.
[Guest]: And I couldn't understand.
[Guest]: I said, itni agar khushi ho rahi hai, toh sab log roh kyu rahe hain?
[Guest]: That was my puzzling thing, which was answered many, many years later.
[Guest]: And then we came back and we were in Nainital.
[Guest]: Then our grandfather, who used to stay with us.
[Guest]: He was very attached to my father.
[Guest]: Actually, my father lost his mother very young and his father didn't remarry because he wanted
[Guest]: to bring up his boys himself.
[Guest]: So he brought up my father and my tauji and the two brothers were very close.
[Guest]: And my grandfather was very happy that after my father lost his first wife, a girl like
[Guest]: my mother accepted him as a husband and undertook to bring up the little child who was motherless.
[Guest]: And then Binu and I were inseparable, we were like twins, and my mother brought us up together.
[Guest]: And one of the fairest stepmothers, I mean, for years, we didn't even know we were not
[Guest]: born of the same mother.
[Guest]: Anyway, so my grandfather used to love my mother very much.
[Guest]: And he always said, I still remember the Pahadi sentence, he used to say, tuil mein bachke
[Guest]: pehve hallo, you have fed my little calf and brought it to life.
[Guest]: So he contracted, we were told, some liver ailment and he passed away.
[Guest]: The day for us, you know, at that age, life and death were matters we didn't notice.
[Guest]: So the day he was breathing his last, we had a family retainer called Kushalia and we were
[Guest]: sent with Kushalia to the forest.
[Guest]: We were living very close to a forest called Sherka Danda.
[Guest]: And so Kushalia was a very good babysitter and Kushalia was given a hamper with food
[Guest]: for us and said, inko shamko hi laana, tab tak yahan sab ho jayega.
[Guest]: So we went there and I asked Binu, what is happening at home?
[Guest]: So she said, tumko pata nahi, dadaji toh mar gaye.
[Guest]: So I said, marna kya hota hai?
[Guest]: So Kushalia said ki, dekho abhi tumko samjhata hu.
[Guest]: So he looked around, he found a dead bird near a bush.
[Guest]: So he picked it up by one leg, I remember.
[Guest]: It was a little sparrow, frozen.
[Guest]: And he brought it to us and said, dekho ye chidiya jo hai, ye mar gayi hai.
[Guest]: She can't sing, she can't fly, she can't do anything.
[Guest]: So I said, what will happen to her?
[Guest]: So he said, we have to bury it.
[Guest]: So I said, will you bury, will they bury dadaji also?
[Guest]: He said, nahi, unko toh jala denge.
[Guest]: So I started crying because it was such a horrific thought.
[Guest]: So I said, unko chidiya ki tarah kyu nahi bury kar sakte hain?
[Guest]: So he said ki, nahi, humaari aaya aisa hi hota hai.
[Guest]: So that was another thing about grown-up world, which I couldn't make out.
[Guest]: Anyway, very ceremoniously, Binu and I wrapped the bird up in pattas and Kushalia dug a little
[Guest]: grave for it and then he closed it.
[Guest]: And then he said ki, jab Angrej log marte hain, toh usme cross laga dete hain.
[Guest]: So he made a cross out of twigs and he put it on the grave and very solemnly had our
[Guest]: lunch and everything.
[Guest]: By the time we came home, we had forgotten all about it.
[Guest]: And we came home and we found that the house had some people there, but the houses in those
[Guest]: days were always full of relatives and people.
[Guest]: So that was my first introduction to death and the rituals.
[Guest]: Then at some point, my father was transferred to Almora.
[Guest]: And we lived in a beautiful airy house in a place called Rani Diyar, which must have
[Guest]: been some queen's gardens or something.
[Guest]: It had a big pine tree forest next to it, where the British soldiers killed in an effort
[Guest]: to win the hill estate had been buried and that dated back to 1825.
[Guest]: And there were graves and we used to, we had, by then my sister and I had learned the numbers.
[Guest]: So we used to join the alphabets and the numbers and find out whose grave it was and, you know,
[Guest]: what, which year he had died.
[Guest]: And then my mother would point out, see, he was so young and we'd say, but he was 24.
[Guest]: That's old.
[Guest]: Chaubis saal ka tha, toh bahut buddha tha, for us it was like that.
[Guest]: Then my sister was admitted to school and I used to throw tantrums all the time.
[Guest]: So my mother sent me to school and the school took me in on sufferance because I was just
[Guest]: three.
[Guest]: In those days, the minimum age was five.
[Guest]: So I was taken in at three.
[Guest]: But then the principal met my mother next time and she told her that I was too bright
[Guest]: for my class.
[Guest]: So she was putting me in class one.
[Guest]: So I entered class one when I was only three.
[Guest]: And I found that, you know, I was very cocky.
[Guest]: I found that I knew much more than all the students in the class.
[Guest]: And I used to boss over them.
[Guest]: And when they didn't do their homework, then they used to come to me and I used to help
[Guest]: them with their homework and so on.
[Guest]: But our principal was, I think, an American woman called Miss West and it was run by some
[Guest]: American diocese.
[Guest]: And Miss West used to wear her hair in long pigtails tied around her head like the Lamas
[Guest]: women used to, the Bhutia women who came to sell spices and corals and things in winter.
[Guest]: They used to wear their hair like that.
[Guest]: So I told my mother that Miss West is a Lamayani.
[Guest]: So she said, no, she is not a Lamayani, she is English.
[Guest]: So I said, what is English?
[Guest]: So my mother said, they are whiter than us.
[Guest]: So that was my criteria.
[Guest]: And Miss West was very fond of me.
[Guest]: And she told my mother, you know, I think your daughter needs a really good set of teachers
[Guest]: to teach her.
[Guest]: And then we changed houses.
[Guest]: My father got a promotion, but we changed houses to the other side of the town.
[Guest]: And it was a big jump for my father.
[Guest]: So it was a very nice bungalow, but it was too far from the school that I was going to.
[Guest]: So my older sister continued going there, but I was put in an Arya Kanya Patshala because
[Guest]: it was within walking distance.
[Guest]: This was a school run for orphans.
[Guest]: And they were threadbare.
[Guest]: They had nothing.
[Guest]: I remember our classrooms had nothing.
[Guest]: So I used to carry a little cushion from home and go and sit there and learn whatever they
[Guest]: had to teach me.
[Guest]: It was crumbling staircases.
[Guest]: The teachers had themselves grown up in the orphanage and were now teaching other children.
[Guest]: School was so poor that it didn't even have a clock.
[Guest]: Clock and wristwatches in those days were big luxuries.
[Guest]: So the sole chaparasi the school had used to sit on the steps and keep an ear cocked
[Guest]: for the nearby government girls school where my older sister studied.
[Guest]: And when their bell rang, then he would quickly come and ring our bell.
[Guest]: So we used to call him Ghanta Master.
[Guest]: So I studied there for about a year.
[Guest]: And then my father was transferred out to a place called Shahjanpur.
[Guest]: And that's where I really came into my own.
[Guest]: There was another Christian missionary school which took both of us in.
[Guest]: And by then I think I was in class three.
[Guest]: And I made many friends.
[Guest]: My best friend was the son of a dhaba owner called Abdullah.
[Guest]: He used to take me to his father's dhaba because it was on the way to our house and showed
[Guest]: me how tandoors work.
[Guest]: And he had a stepmother who was a terrible woman, he said.
[Guest]: And we both used to pray that she dies soon.
[Guest]: Abdullah's father was a very sweet man.
[Guest]: And for some reason, I remember him always chopping coriander.
[Guest]: And so we were there for about two, three years.
[Guest]: And then it was an office cum residence.
[Guest]: It was a huge house made of old lakhori bricks, thin bricks, which were very ancient.
[Guest]: And my parents had a lot of friends among the local old, you know, thekhanedars and
[Guest]: riyasat people because my mother had grown up in that.
[Guest]: And they were very good friends.
[Guest]: And most of them were Muslims.
[Guest]: And they had chosen to stay back because it had never occurred to anyone that a day would
[Guest]: come when Muslims would feel themselves squashed in any way.
[Guest]: And they were all, you know, I mean, we never felt that it was a Hindu house or a Muslim
[Guest]: house.
[Guest]: And of course, there's no question of untouchability or anything.
[Guest]: And we had a home peon called Sharfi Lal, who was a kind of a hybrid.
[Guest]: His wife was Muslim, he himself was a Hindu, but they were very strange in their mannerisms.
[Guest]: But Sharfi Lal was a very affectionate fellow and he used to show us around the town.
[Guest]: And so we were there for about two, three years.
[Guest]: And I remember my parents buying a Shahjahanpuri carpet.
[Guest]: In those days, they used to make very beautiful red and black and beige carpets in Shahjahanpuri.
[Guest]: They were called Shahjahanpuri carpets.
[Guest]: And so my parents bought a carpet and I remember my sister and I spread it and then rolled
[Guest]: on it from side to side.
[Guest]: I remember the touch of wool because in the hills, every house has home, you know, inexpensive
[Guest]: but wool carpets because it's so cold.
[Guest]: So it reminded us both of Almora.
[Guest]: And in the evenings, we used to sit outside and there were mehndi kiaris next to, they
[Guest]: kind of bordered the whole house.
[Guest]: And there was a bhishti who used to come morning and evening with a mashak.
[Guest]: Most people don't know what a mashak is.
[Guest]: It's a big carcass of a buffalo, which has been, it's a skin of an entire buffalo, which
[Guest]: has been dried and made into a huge water bag.
[Guest]: And there's a strap attached to it, which the bhishti used to put on his shoulder.
[Guest]: And he used to hold the neck very delicately.
[Guest]: The neck had a kind of a spout-like thing and he used to sprinkle the borders, the henna
[Guest]: borders with that.
[Guest]: And the smell, I can't forget that smell.
[Guest]: You know, it was the smell of the first rain, of wet leaves, of henna, of all good things
[Guest]: and we were very happy there.
[Guest]: So whenever I smell henna, you know, in the first rains, I think of Shahjahanpur.
[Guest]: Then we, my father was transferred.
[Guest]: He was for some reason always transferred when we were in mid-school term.
[Guest]: So by the time we reached the next town, no textbooks were available.
[Guest]: So we had to buy secondhand textbooks in which many pages were missing.
[Guest]: So we had to keep consulting our classmates about the missing pages.
[Guest]: There was no, you know, fax or no way to type.
[Guest]: So we used to take it down meticulously by hand and then glue it to our books.
[Guest]: I remember that.
[Guest]: And from Shahjahanpur, we went to, I think, to Lucknow.
[Guest]: And Lucknow, we had to live in a flat in a multi-storied building, which we didn't like
[Guest]: at all because it was very small and pokey and too much noise and too many neighbors.
[Guest]: My mother didn't like that flat either because we had, we were lived in a semi-rural area
[Guest]: so far with big houses, airy houses, with nothing too much to our name, but lots of
[Guest]: space and, you know, our own places, but Lucknow was different, but the school was very good.
[Guest]: It was run by a very, very intelligent woman called Rani Sarup Kumari Bakshi.
[Guest]: She was the wife of some, she belonged to a Zamindar family and Lucknow still has a
[Guest]: place called Bakshi Ka Talab after their ancestors.
[Guest]: She was an educationist to the core and she really took me in hand.
[Guest]: And she told my mother, your girl has a natural ear for music and rhythm.
[Guest]: So I'll get her to join our dance classes.
[Guest]: My mother was quite delighted.
[Guest]: She was always keen that we should learn.
[Guest]: So my older sister started learning music and I started learning Bharatanatyam.
[Guest]: And we had, I remember we had an Asamiya teacher, you know, in those days, India was so vibrant
[Guest]: and so mobile and so full of interconnections and interconnectivity.
[Guest]: And my mother, who had grown up in Shantiniketan and been educated, found herself an aberration
[Guest]: in the hill society.
[Guest]: But she came into her own space culturally when we came to Lucknow, which was such a
[Guest]: sophisticated city, we had very nice neighbors.
[Guest]: And they were from Kerala, three working women from Kerala, two were called Soshama and one
[Guest]: was Leela.
[Guest]: Leela was from the north and these two were from the south.
[Guest]: And very interesting, extremely well-educated single women.
[Guest]: And then the other flat had a doctor's family who was also a pakhavach player, brilliant
[Guest]: pakhavach player.
[Guest]: So I remember my mother discussing music with him and his mother and his family, they were
[Guest]: music aficionados.
[Guest]: And I still remember him when he cleaned his cycle, he always sang Alaiya Bilawal, Kavan
[Guest]: Batariya Gayi Lomai.
[Guest]: And then sometimes when he was in a good mood, he would say, Aau, aaj tumko pakhavach sikhata
[Guest]: hoon.
[Guest]: Then he would go dha, ki, ta, ta, tik, ta, ki, ta, ta, tik.
[Guest]: So, you know, it was, the house was very small, very dingy and you know, of course, very claustrophobic,
[Guest]: but the neighbors made it worth our while and the school was the, you know, cherry on
[Guest]: top.
[Guest]: So we both enjoyed it very much.
[Guest]: And I did exceedingly well for some strange reason in school.
[Guest]: But when I was in class seven, we suddenly got transferred again in midterm.
[Guest]: This time we went to Nainital.
[Guest]: And I remember getting to Nainital, in those days, you traveled by train and your luggage
[Guest]: was sent by truck.
[Guest]: And my mother, who was so overwhelmed with four children and luggage and everything,
[Guest]: she locked up the keys in one of the trunks which went by truck and we just carried some
[Guest]: portals and some small attache cases of stuff for the journey.
[Guest]: And when we reached the house home in Nainital, again a very nice, huge, airy, double-storied
[Guest]: house, the office was on the ground floor and we had the old, the entire first floor
[Guest]: to ourselves.
[Guest]: My mother confessed sheepishly, she had locked the keys.
[Guest]: And my father was speechless with rage.
[Guest]: He was just speechless.
[Guest]: He just stared at her with such anger in his eyes.
[Guest]: And my mother kept saying in Pahari, main kya karu, main kya karu, main kya karu, main
[Guest]: kya karu.
[Guest]: So we thought it was very funny.
[Guest]: So we set up a chant and started dancing around her, main kya karu, main kya karu, main kya
[Guest]: karu.
[Guest]: And finally, my father burst out laughing.
[Guest]: So my sisters and I had by then learned that if you are poor and you run into trouble,
[Guest]: the best way to get out of trouble is to be witty and is to be able to sing and dance
[Guest]: and charm your way out of problems.
[Guest]: And so our parents, whenever they squabbled, we would always start miming something or
[Guest]: you know, distract them a piece by doing something.
[Guest]: And so Nainital was then a big change because we then stayed on there for almost 10 years.
[Guest]: I finished school, my older sister finished school, and my younger sibling started school,
[Guest]: by which time the government schools were not very good.
[Guest]: So they were put in the Jesuit convents to my grandmother's horror.
[Guest]: And she told my mother, ye sab Kiranti bana ke chhodenge isko, and my mother said ki ab
[Guest]: zamana badal gaya hi ja, ab kuch nahi hota hai, ab bhejne do mujhe inko.
[Guest]: And I, who had always been to a Hindi medium school, was expected to be both mother and
[Guest]: coach to these two kids.
[Guest]: So you know, I had to spruce up my act.
[Guest]: I just couldn't.
[Guest]: I was too proud to confess that I didn't know English.
[Guest]: So I learned English almost overnight and started teaching these kids, putting them
[Guest]: through their strange math jargon and their schools, you know, sing, sing, sing, sing,
[Guest]: mother sing, pat sing to mother, mother sing to pat.
[Guest]: And I used to tell my mother, ye kaisi kitab hai, isme hamari jaise toh koi bachche nahi,
[Guest]: ye sab sunere baal wale, Angrezo ke bachche hai.
[Guest]: So she said ki nahi, ye logon ki textbook hai.
[Guest]: So I said, par inko kaisa lagta hai?
[Guest]: So my sister said, humko toh bahut accha lagta hai, hum toh sochte hai, hum bhi Angrez hai.
[Guest]: So I just looked at them and kept quiet because I felt that was not the way that, you know,
[Guest]: I felt.
[Guest]: But anyway, so I did class, part of class 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 in Nainital.
[Guest]: And again, I did well to my utter surprise.
[Guest]: The nicest thing that Nainital did was to set my mother free to write.
[Guest]: All of a sudden, she began to, you know, write prolifically.
[Guest]: And I became kind of her secretary because I was quite as good at Hindi plus I was also,
[Guest]: I think, exceedingly cocky, which was very foolish of me.
[Guest]: But my mother had total faith in me.
[Guest]: So she used to give me, she used to handwrite her manuscripts and she used to give it to
[Guest]: me ki isme koi galtiyon ho toh sudhar dena.
[Guest]: I mean, imagine a class 7, 8 brat, you know, I was and but I used to be cockily correct
[Guest]: everything and correct it.
[Guest]: Then my mother would say ki isko Dhanbir Bharti ko bhej do, Dhanbir Bharti being the editor
[Guest]: of Dharmiyon, which was one of the best selling magazines.
[Guest]: She took it that she was so good that what she wrote would be published and it was published.
[Guest]: She was very sure that Dhanbir Bharti would write to her and ask her for more and he did.
[Guest]: She was very sure that she would be paid fairly well, which he did to the extent it was possible.
[Guest]: And they became very good friends all through their communication over mails and the manuscripts
[Guest]: exchange.
[Guest]: She used to write on fullscape paper.
[Guest]: I used to correct it.
[Guest]: Then I used to put it in a registered envelope, post office was on our way to school.
[Guest]: And I used to mail it to Dhanbir Bharti to his address in Times of India building.
[Guest]: And he used to acknowledge it by a postcard saying Shivani ji aapka mil gaya patra aur
[Guest]: wo.
[Guest]: And much later when I joined Times of India, I asked Dhanbir Bharti, I said ki aapko ajeeb
[Guest]: nahi lagta tha ki aisi luti piti si manuscript aa rahi hai aapke paas aur bilkul ghasit mein
[Guest]: likha hua ye wo.
[Guest]: He said nahi shabd to heerai the, shabd to heerai the, hum to johari log hain, humko
[Guest]: to aata hai parakh na, shabd to heerai the.
[Guest]: So later my mother and Bharti ji also exchanged many tales.
[Guest]: One of them was when my mother was writing one of her novels which is serialized.
[Guest]: And it was exactly like they described Dickens's work being serialized because he said that
[Guest]: there were queues of people waiting to buy Dharmug when Shivani's novels were being serialized.
[Guest]: And my mother used to write them for one issue, send it on and then start working on the next.
[Guest]: So all her novels were actually serials.
[Guest]: They could be made into serials quite easily because they stopped where, you know, she
[Guest]: had a knack for leaving the people gasping for more.
[Guest]: And that in itself became a big point of prestige with her and Dharmbir Bharti ki Shivani ka
[Guest]: novel aa raha hai.
[Guest]: Later on I worked with both Times of India and Hindustan Times Group.
[Guest]: My mother used to write for Dharmbir Bharti, both groups, because Dharmbir Bharti was in
[Guest]: Times of India and another great writer Manohar Shyam Joshi was editor of Saptahik Hindustan.
[Guest]: So even before I became their colleague, I knew them very well by their handwriting and
[Guest]: by their general effusiveness about my mother's writings.
[Guest]: Toh diddi likhti thi bahut bichari kab likhti thi log puchte hai, when did your mother write,
[Guest]: what kind of paper.
[Guest]: Poor thing, she hardly had resources.
[Guest]: She barely had time to sit down and collect her thoughts.
[Guest]: So she was probably thinking all along through the day when she was making meals for us,
[Guest]: when she was putting us through our lessons, whatever.
[Guest]: And then late at night she used to sit and write on the dining table with whatever pen
[Guest]: she could lay her hands on.
[Guest]: The first drafts were inevitably made on old, you know, scarred school books, copies that
[Guest]: we had left behind.
[Guest]: And you know, we were always short of funds in our house because both my parents were
[Guest]: very bad money managers.
[Guest]: And there were four of us plus any number of cousins who used to be sent to Nainital
[Guest]: because the schools were good.
[Guest]: And they stayed and went to school with us.
[Guest]: And food was very simple, dal, sabzi and roti chawal, which used to be cooked early in the
[Guest]: morning in a cooker, one of those long cookers, I don't know what they're called.
[Guest]: It was made in Britain.
[Guest]: It's a brass thing with a little sigdi at the bottom and three huge pots on top, one
[Guest]: on top of the other.
[Guest]: And the sigdi was lit and it was closed, and then when it was opened and the dal was ready,
[Guest]: rice was ready, vegetables were steamed, and then they were quickly chankot.
[Guest]: And at nine o'clock we had our lunch.
[Guest]: And then we were given paratha and sabzi for aarti.
[Guest]: All this used to be assembled by nine o'clock because we had to run to catch our school
[Guest]: bus at 9.30.
[Guest]: And we ran downhill and caught our bus.
[Guest]: And I remember it was a good three kilometer, three, four kilometer walk for us each way.
[Guest]: But it didn't feel like that.
[Guest]: We used to do it three, four times a day even.
[Guest]: And then my mother had to, you know, clean up and get everything done.
[Guest]: She had helpers, of course, but my father was very squeamish about his meals and the
[Guest]: manner of meals of those days, you know, who were very demanding.
[Guest]: But my mother loved to pander to his taste because he loved good food and one wow from
[Guest]: him meant a lot to her.
[Guest]: I thought that was very foolish and we had frequent fights over that.
[Guest]: And she used to mumble, you eat this and that, so and so doesn't like it.
[Guest]: So I said, why do you have to pander to everybody?
[Guest]: Why don't you just cook and be done with it?
[Guest]: They should be thankful they're getting a cooked meal at the end of the day.
[Guest]: She said, keep your mouth shut, girl, I'm very scared of you.
[Guest]: So I said, why are you scared?
[Guest]: She said, no, I'm not scared of you, I'm scared for you because one day you'll get
[Guest]: married and you'll have a husband and when he tells you and you don't do it, you'll
[Guest]: see what happens to you.
[Guest]: So that was just mother-daughter conversation.
[Guest]: And I was quite rebellious and primarily because I felt that my mother was doing too much without
[Guest]: being thanked for it, you know.
[Guest]: And then there were all those family members and aunts and grandaunts who used to drop
[Guest]: by and say, you know, your daughter is very bright.
[Guest]: How come, you know, Bino is not doing so well in school?
[Guest]: You must be teaching her specially, which was a big fat lie.
[Guest]: My mother spent four times more time on Bino than on me.
[Guest]: But, you know, it kind of created a rift in the minds of the children that, you know,
[Guest]: there's something which was denied Bino, which we all had and we all grew up feeling now.
[Guest]: I talked to my siblings, they say, yes, we felt very guilty because we were fairer in
[Guest]: color because we were good looking and we all did, all three of us did exceedingly well
[Guest]: in school without any coaching, without any tutorials, without any help from anyone except
[Guest]: each other.
[Guest]: You know, my mother occasionally would go to Lucknow to broadcast All India, her short
[Guest]: stories in All India Radio, which was very prestigious in those days.
[Guest]: And she took my little brother with her because he wouldn't stay without her.
[Guest]: And I had to see to it that my sister woke up early in the morning and got her ready,
[Guest]: put on her shoes and socks, saw to it that her uniforms were ready and ironed and everything.
[Guest]: And Bino saw to the kitchen that meals were cooked on time.
[Guest]: So between the two of us, we had our act together.
[Guest]: And so it was a period in which I began to feel that the world was not so fair, that
[Guest]: things were not equally divided and that people were mean for no reason except that they felt
[Guest]: envious of people who were doing well.
[Guest]: And my mother had countless cousins, of course, we belonged to the hills, so she had countless
[Guest]: cousins and I always felt that they were very envious of my mother's past in Shantiniketan,
[Guest]: her special upbringing in the Riyasats during vacations.
[Guest]: The fact that Tagore came and stayed in Almora and Nandlal Bose came and stayed in the house,
[Guest]: you know, so they were always making snide comments about, ki haan par parathe toh achche
[Guest]: nahi bana, kya kiya tune Shantiniketan mein reh ke Gaura parathe banane tujhe nahi aaye.
[Guest]: Tumhari maa ko achar banane nahi aata hai, bas usse toh Bengali kavita par bahas karalo.
[Guest]: And I used to feel very angry, Beenu sir, chhodo tumko kya padta hai farag.
[Guest]: I said nahi, but you know, something is not right.
[Guest]: And I was, I could not articulate it.
[Guest]: It was much later that I found the language to justify or unjustify things and to articulate
[Guest]: my rage, but I remember being full of an unvoiced rage, ki kahin kuch gadbad hai, kuch cheez
[Guest]: hai jo theek nahi hai, aur rishtedariyon mein iska root hai.
[Guest]: So to that extent, I was always a detached observer of, you know, family comings and
[Guest]: goings and everyone said ki yeh toh bahut kam bolti hai.
[Guest]: They said ki isko toh, humko toh pata hi nahi tha ki panch ke chaar bachche hain, yeh
[Guest]: toh kabhi iski toh awaaz hi nahi sunte hain.
[Guest]: Because I chose to keep my thoughts to myself because once or twice when I did, I got into
[Guest]: big trouble.
[Guest]: And so I became introverted.
[Guest]: But then I had, by then I had discovered the world of books, both English and Hindi.
[Guest]: So I was reading all the time.
[Guest]: We had an apple tree.
[Guest]: I remember that was my favorite perch.
[Guest]: I used to sit, there was a kind of a place among the branches which made a perfect seat
[Guest]: and I had a cushion which I put there and I sat and read through the day on holidays.
[Guest]: Otherwise, we had a huge lawn where, you know, it was quite sunny.
[Guest]: So we used to sit there and I used to read and do my homework and everything.
[Guest]: Nainital was a wonderful place.
[Guest]: We had a beautiful house with horse chestnut trees and oak trees and apple trees.
[Guest]: And my brother and sister were very happy in their school.
[Guest]: You know, those are very good schools in those days.
[Guest]: My older sister began to develop some, you know, sort of anxieties and also some kind
[Guest]: of anger, which she wouldn't voice but I could sense it because I was very close to her.
[Guest]: And some kind of competitiveness, which I didn't think was called for at all.
[Guest]: I was all open and willing to share and share alike.
[Guest]: But, you know, there are things you cannot share.
[Guest]: You can't chop off your brain and, you know, serve it to someone on a platter.
[Guest]: So anyway, then my sister finished school two years before me and she went to Allahabad
[Guest]: University and it meant a big dent in my parents' savings.
[Guest]: But my mother insisted that my children must go to a university and local universities
[Guest]: are not good.
[Guest]: So my older sister was sent to Allahabad.
[Guest]: And I remember when the paper page, the admission forms came, she turned to my mother and said,
[Guest]: Tu mujhe university bhej rahi hai, main toh padhne mein acchi nahi hoon.
[Guest]: So my mother hugged her and said, ki main tujhe achcha bana ke manunge, tune kya samjha
[Guest]: hai aise, tere barbi ke baad shadi ho jayegi?
[Guest]: Nahi.
[Guest]: Meri koi ladki MA kiye bina shadi nahi kar sakte.
[Guest]: So anyway, my sister pulled a face, but she went to the university, enjoyed herself hugely.
[Guest]: And two years when she was away, I came into my own for the first time.
[Guest]: You know, I felt that I was not guilty all the time.
[Guest]: I was not hunched up.
[Guest]: I walked with confidence.
[Guest]: I walked with my, made my own friends.
[Guest]: I did what I wanted to do.
[Guest]: And I found more time to talk to my mother and to help her out with her writing because
[Guest]: somehow or the other, by then I had gauged that, you know, her writing was extremely
[Guest]: precious and that she was deliberately playing it down to keep everybody happy and to keep
[Guest]: her cousin's mouth shut.
[Guest]: But I felt that that was something irreplaceable.
[Guest]: The kind of letters she used to get from editors, you know, Kamleshwar, Dharmbir Bharti, you
[Guest]: know, Manohar Shyam Joshi, then every summer, writers who came to Nainital would come and
[Guest]: visit her.
[Guest]: Mahadevi Verma came once, I remember, and she and my mother became very good friends.
[Guest]: Later, when my father died in Lucknow, my mother was in mourning and Mahadevi Verma
[Guest]: and all these writers came to her help and sort of helped her sort herself out.
[Guest]: And Amritlal Nagar and Mahadevi Verma were her closest friends, and they both told her
[Guest]: that you have to write to survive, you know, not just survive financially, but also survive
[Guest]: emotionally and be a whole person.
[Guest]: So my mother said, I got married at such a young age, I can't even write.
[Guest]: Without anyone, you can't even think.
[Guest]: So Mahadevi Verma said, look Shivani, I tell you clearly, we can live without a man.
[Guest]: She said, when I was young, I used to say that I want to become a Sanyasi, and I went to
[Guest]: an ashram.
[Guest]: My father, on my insistence, took me to the ashram.
[Guest]: The Swamiji, he put a tarp in front of his face.
[Guest]: So I asked Baba, why did he do this?
[Guest]: He said, he doesn't see women.
[Guest]: So I said, the man who can't even see a woman, why should I be his disciple?
[Guest]: And I came.
[Guest]: I didn't become a Sanyasi, why are you thinking of becoming a Sanyasi?
[Guest]: So that really impacted my mother a great deal.
[Guest]: And Amritlal Naga told my mother, he said, if you read and write, you become like a snake.
[Guest]: It needs food every day.
[Guest]: If you don't write, one day it will turn around and bite you, and you will become a victim
[Guest]: of depression.
[Guest]: So write, write Shivani, write.
[Guest]: My mother has also written a memo, when he died, she said, he's the one who told me,
[Guest]: write Shivani.
[Guest]: You write Shivani, write.
[Guest]: That's the title of the piece.
[Guest]: So you know, one gathers wisdom over the years without realizing that you are gathering wisdom,
[Guest]: you know, and you gather languages without realizing you're gathering languages.
[Guest]: But it was a very rich childhood.
[Guest]: My mother loved to get us books.
[Guest]: And I remember there was a man called Dhanamia, he was one of those old remnants of Ruhail
[Guest]: Ghand.
[Guest]: He had very fair eyes, and he used to wear a turban.
[Guest]: He loved my mother because she loved books, and she knew what books were about.
[Guest]: So he used to come, and then he used to sit and say, Madam, give him tea, good tea.
[Guest]: So my mother would get him good tea made.
[Guest]: And then they would sit and say, he said, all these ma'ams, Priory Cottage and Shercote
[Guest]: House, Mills and Boon, all of them are from Mills and Boon, they are good literary things,
[Guest]: so I just bring them for you.
[Guest]: He also had a way of selling them.
[Guest]: And whatever he sold you, next month he would come and buy it at half price from you.
[Guest]: It worked for him.
[Guest]: And it helped us, you know, because we were quite poor, frankly, so we could ill afford.
[Guest]: So that was one big thing for our mental horizons opening up.
[Guest]: And then, you know, my mother used to help us with our schoolwork and things.
[Guest]: I never put any strain on her primarily because I knew that she was strained enough.
[Guest]: But she loved to read my books, she loved to read my essays, and she had done Hindi
[Guest]: in Shantiniketan, but not of the level that was being taught to us in class 11 and 12.
[Guest]: So whatever new came my way, I would rush to her and tell her.
[Guest]: Then her older sister, who was also with her in Shantiniketan, was one of the loveliest
[Guest]: women I know.
[Guest]: Her husband was a doctor and they lived nearby in Mukteshwar, Dr. Pushpesh Pant, the great
[Guest]: Foodian international scientist, is her son, and we grew up together, and she used to,
[Guest]: you know, send books to my mother.
[Guest]: She used to send my mother homemade Bengali sweets, which she knew my mother craved.
[Guest]: And when my mother had had too much, she would just go and crash out at Mukteshwar.
[Guest]: And I loved going there because the house was full of books and bound copies of all
[Guest]: the magazines, Bhairav Prasad, Gupta's Kahaani in volumes, Dharmiyog in volumes.
[Guest]: And we used to just sit and read through the vacations.
[Guest]: So Nainital was good.
[Guest]: Then I also joined the Allahabad University, and I went to the hostel.
[Guest]: For some reason, I got some kind of a scholarship, a merit scholarship.
[Guest]: So Bino, first thing Bino told me was, ki tumko scholarship mil rahi hai.
[Guest]: So the money that you get, you must give it to me, because I need more money than you
[Guest]: do.
[Guest]: If you are fresher, you won't need much money, but I must have more money.
[Guest]: So I used to quietly hand over when the money orders, when the money order came, I handed
[Guest]: it all to Bino and told her ki mujhe itna itna dena hai, and just lived like that.
[Guest]: I didn't crave to go to go shopping or go anywhere really, to see movies or to restaurants
[Guest]: and things.
[Guest]: And Bino had a whole band of friends.
[Guest]: She was a very friendly creature, and she had a whole band of friends.
[Guest]: For some reason, she had given them to understand that I was my mother's favorite.
[Guest]: So they teased me a lot about being my mother's sweetie, and they used to call me sweetie,
[Guest]: sweetie, and things like that.
[Guest]: And I quietly sort of kept my head down and hoped that they wouldn't.
[Guest]: But for some strange reason, again, I did very well, though I opted for the English
[Guest]: medium in university.
[Guest]: For my honors class, I accepted English literature and Sanskrit literature and ancient Indian
[Guest]: history as my side subject.
[Guest]: So I did well enough to be inducted into the famous Friday Club of Allahabad University.
[Guest]: I won the Chancellor's Medal as an undergraduate, which was quite rare in those days.
[Guest]: And then my father was transferred to Allahabad.
[Guest]: So we went home and started staying there.
[Guest]: And my older sister was not very happy about the arrangement, because then again, it started,
[Guest]: you know, the relatives and friends coming and saying,
[Guest]: Oh, Shivani ji, this is her.
[Guest]: And then, Oh, Meenu, you have got a very good result.
[Guest]: So and so said, she's, you know, she's got the Chancellor's Medal and all that.
[Guest]: And I could see my sister curling up.
[Guest]: And I used to curl up with embarrassment, and I used to hide myself.
[Guest]: And my mother always said, Ki tum chhip kyun jaati ho?
[Guest]: And I couldn't tell her that I hide because I carry this huge guilt on my head about overshadowing
[Guest]: my sister.
[Guest]: And anyway, so I did pretty well in MA and immediately I was offered a permanent lecturership
[Guest]: at the university.
[Guest]: So I, in 66, I graduated in 66 July, and the winter of 66, I joined as a lecturer at the
[Guest]: Allahabad University.
[Guest]: Most of my undergraduate class was just a year or two younger than me.
[Guest]: And they knew me and they all ribbed me and kind of tried to misbehave, though they were
[Guest]: very nice.
[Guest]: So it was a fun year.
[Guest]: And then my father said that he wanted me to get married and that, you know, there was
[Guest]: somebody who wanted to meet me and he thought that he was intelligent and well educated
[Guest]: and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So then that's how I met my husband.
[Guest]: And we decided to get married.
[Guest]: My husband said, if you want to get married, then why not get married now?
[Guest]: So in 67, we were married.
[Guest]: And I resigned the university job, which everybody took for granted, you know, today, I think
[Guest]: nobody would think of quitting a permanent job like that.
[Guest]: But everybody said, we had to do it, we got such a good groom, what else does a girl want?
[Guest]: And I didn't like that at all.
[Guest]: You know, that was not the reason for getting married.
[Guest]: Anyway, fortunately, when we got married, we went to the backwaters of Madhya Pradesh,
[Guest]: places like Nimach and Panna and Jabalpur and so on.
[Guest]: So I was lost to this particular crowd.
[Guest]: And then I started writing.
[Guest]: I wrote my first short story soon after I got married, we were in Nimach and I sent
[Guest]: it to Dharamveer Bharti and Dharamveer Bharti sent me a very nice postcard, which I still
[Guest]: have saying, you say that this is your first short story and I see great hopes for you
[Guest]: and please send me whatever you write, hence, I was delighted.
[Guest]: Anyway, the short story got published, I told my mother and she, you know, was very pleased.
[Guest]: Neither of us ever mentioned to Dharamveer Bharti, his mother and daughter.
[Guest]: Years later, when my mother was visiting Bombay, it came up and she said, who else is writing
[Guest]: well?
[Guest]: He said, there is a young girl in Madhya Pradesh, Imranal Pandey, she is writing very well.
[Guest]: So my mother burst out laughing, she said, she is my daughter, he said, don't be joking.
[Guest]: But when I met him as a colleague and colleague cum trainee under him, he said that he was
[Guest]: very pleased that neither of us had, you know, promoted the other or, I mean, I would have
[Guest]: promoted him anyway, but he said, if Shivani ji had said, then I could not have refused,
[Guest]: but without her saying, I published it, so I am at peace.
[Guest]: So those were the days when editors had a personal relationship with the people they
[Guest]: published.
[Guest]: Publishers had a personal relationship, my mother's publishers, her first collection
[Guest]: of short stories was published by Varanasi Prakashan, by a man called Purushottam Das
[Guest]: Modi, very learned man, very good man.
[Guest]: He was a great mentor to my mother, explained to her, you know, the mechanics of the publishing
[Guest]: world.
[Guest]: He also told her, look, Shivani, you are writing so well, your future is very bright, Varanasi
[Guest]: is a very good place, but for publishing, Delhi has shifted everything, so you find
[Guest]: a publisher in Delhi.
[Guest]: So then my mother contacted, then he introduced her to Dinanath Malhotra, who was then running
[Guest]: the Hind Prakashan, and he published my mother till as long as he lived.
[Guest]: When he gave up and his son inherited, he was more interested in other esoteric areas,
[Guest]: so we shifted to her present publisher, Rajkamal Radhakrishna Prakashan.
[Guest]: But Dinanath Malhotra and his wife became like, you know, sort of surrogate parents
[Guest]: to us because our father had died quite young.
[Guest]: And when my brother was getting married, he was getting married to a girl in England,
[Guest]: and my mother said, she's very, this particular, she said, ki maine teen ladkiyon ki shadi
[Guest]: mein apni haddiyan galayi hain, main kisi bhi ladki ke maabab par bojh nahi karna chahati
[Guest]: hoon, toh tum log koi nahi aaugi, jam yaha aayenge, toh I give a reception, you can dance
[Guest]: and sing to your delight, and you can all come and participate, but only Miki and I
[Guest]: will go for the baraat, I don't want to, England mein waisi parishani hoti hai sabko.
[Guest]: So my mother and my brother flew away, and I remember Dinanath ji and his wife came to
[Guest]: the airport and gave her a nariyal and a shawl, he said apni behen ko hum bete ki baraat leke
[Guest]: bida kar rahe hain, and a shawl and everything, and he really made her feel that, you know,
[Guest]: it was a happy occasion, of course, the family didn't care.
[Guest]: When my mother came back and then gave a reception, then of course, everybody came crawling out
[Guest]: of the woodworks, but till then nobody was there to help her.
[Guest]: So you know, I somehow felt that I had a parallel world to occupy, you know, I could detach
[Guest]: myself from the family, just carry out my duties to everybody, never cheat on that,
[Guest]: but at the same time, my real family, my real world was that of words and writing.
[Guest]: So when we were in Panna, my husband was, actually my husband had studied economics,
[Guest]: he was a graduate from Cambridge, he had done his master's in Cambridge and done quite well,
[Guest]: then he had joined the IAS, but he was handpicked to go to the World Bank as special assistant
[Guest]: to the then Indian director.
[Guest]: So in 1971, I had one little girl and I was expecting the next baby, and we arrived from
[Guest]: Panna to Washington, my daughter spoke nothing except Bundelkhandi.
[Guest]: And she said, Amma, hum kat aayi gaye, so I said Washington, Bochington, achha, Bochington,
[Guest]: she said, she just clung to me because, you know, she had been disjointed and taken out.
[Guest]: Then we spent some days in a hotel and she saw a black maid in her dress for the first
[Guest]: time.
[Guest]: She said, yeh kya cheez hai?
[Guest]: So I said, yeh maid hai.
[Guest]: She said, meindak hai?
[Guest]: Yaha itta vada meindak hota hai?
[Guest]: So I said, nahi, iska naam kuch aur hai, lekin isko maid kehte hain yaha par, achha.
[Guest]: So like me, she was also learning a whole new language.
[Guest]: And, you know, so we had a very happy time in Washington actually for four years.
[Guest]: And my husband said, you have to do something with yourself.
[Guest]: You can't just be a mother to two.
[Guest]: So we'll get help and you can do something.
[Guest]: So I'd always wanted to study the history of art and architecture.
[Guest]: And I joined the Corcoran School of Art and I did three semesters there.
[Guest]: And we traveled a lot with two small children.
[Guest]: And it was a very enriching period for both of us because we traveled the world and we
[Guest]: saw, you know, various kinds of living, various kinds of customs and surroundings.
[Guest]: And so we came back just on the eve, you know, of just on the beginning of the emergency.
[Guest]: And I distinctly recall the emergency period because a lot of our friends, writers, were
[Guest]: hauled up.
[Guest]: There was an old writer called Gurudutt, who was as old as I am now.
[Guest]: He was hauled up at midnight and sent to jail.
[Guest]: A lot of people that we knew and Dhanbir Bharti, Kamleshwar, my mother was very worried about
[Guest]: all of them because they were all in the print media and the print media was being.
[Guest]: So anyway, fortunately, soon it was over.
[Guest]: I mean, now it seems soon, then it seemed endless.
[Guest]: Then it was over and we were having dinner with our friends.
[Guest]: The night they lifted the emergency and declared the elections and we were with friends who
[Guest]: had a small black and white television set and we saw Mrs. Gandhi come on the television
[Guest]: and announce this.
[Guest]: And his wife said, don't go home.
[Guest]: There might be tanks rolling out on the streets.
[Guest]: So I said, but my children are at home and the person I have asked to babysit for them
[Guest]: would want to go home.
[Guest]: So we have to go home.
[Guest]: And they came to the door and said, please don't go.
[Guest]: Something might happen and we'll never forgive ourselves.
[Guest]: I said, something happens to my children, I'll never forgive myself.
[Guest]: So we kind of went home.
[Guest]: Then I called her up when we reached home.
[Guest]: There's not a bird on the streets, silence of the grave.
[Guest]: Then of course, this whole Janta government thing and we went to Bhopal.
[Guest]: Soon after that, we were transferred back to Bhopal.
[Guest]: My children went back to a Hindi medium school, learnt Hindi like me overnight, except that
[Guest]: it was a reverse.
[Guest]: I learnt Hindi first and English later, they learnt English first and Hindi later.
[Guest]: But they were very bright.
[Guest]: So I didn't have to do much to promote them.
[Guest]: But then I realized that we were comparatively so solvent and my mother had so little.
[Guest]: I was bringing up just two children.
[Guest]: She brought up four plus many others.
[Guest]: Plus then she had all kinds of worries and stress points in her life.
[Guest]: And yet she was able to do so much.
[Guest]: Then I decided to start learning music, classical music.
[Guest]: And I got a very good guru.
[Guest]: And I continued for almost quarter of a century, learnt from really good gurus.
[Guest]: And when my last guru passed away, I stopped.
[Guest]: So from Bhopal, we came back to Delhi.
[Guest]: And I was teaching for some time in College of Jesus and Mary.
[Guest]: The university gave me a permanent job.
[Guest]: Again, I decided to resign because by then teaching English had become meaningless to
[Guest]: me.
[Guest]: I had seen the emergency and I had seen the state of Hindi writers and how poor they were.
[Guest]: And I also remembered my mother's, you know, plight as a young, struggling, young Hindi
[Guest]: writer in a middle class environment where everybody said ki shantini ketan mein padha
[Guest]: hai, lekin angrezi ke bajaye Hindi mein likhti hain.
[Guest]: So that kind of social snobbery, I felt I wouldn't like to teach English.
[Guest]: So I talked to my friend, the poet Shrikant Verma, who was an MP.
[Guest]: He said, look, there is a little agency, news agency, Samachar Bharti.
[Guest]: You could join as cultural correspondent, I'll talk to them, you have sufficient exposure.
[Guest]: So I joined it.
[Guest]: And then a year later, Times of India offered me a slot and I joined them.
[Guest]: Then I became an editor.
[Guest]: So a whole new world opened.
[Guest]: So that's it.
[Amit Varma]: This is so fantastic.
[Amit Varma]: I really enjoyed listening to this.
[Amit Varma]: So many questions I want to ask taking off from this.
[Amit Varma]: But the first of my questions is this, like one of the things I noticed while I was listening
[Amit Varma]: to you is all these beautiful, vivid details, you know, concrete little snapshots of experiences
[Amit Varma]: like you speak of that red plastic purse with the lozenges, you spoke about, you know, lifting
[Amit Varma]: the sparrow from the leg and showing you that this is what that is.
[Amit Varma]: You speak of, you know, Miss Welch's pigtails, for example, and just a bunch of these, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the long pressure cooker and the apple trees and the chestnut trees and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And a couple of questions here.
[Amit Varma]: And one is sort of about the nature of memory, like one thing that I, you know, saw happening
[Amit Varma]: with my father, in fact, before he died, and which happens with people through age, and
[Amit Varma]: in some senses, I see it even in myself, that they say to the edges of your memory, remain
[Amit Varma]: sharp and vibrant, but the middle kind of fades.
[Amit Varma]: And recently, you know, I've had occasion to remember things from childhood, and some
[Amit Varma]: of them are so clear, some of them are so vivid, like they're in front of me.
[Amit Varma]: But everything in between, like what happened in my 30s are completely blurred, I have no
[Amit Varma]: idea of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I saw my father like that, towards the end of his life, of course, he was also suffering
[Unknown]: from memory issues and Parkinson's and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But I remember he once asked me about, you know, he said, I have no memory of your growing
[Amit Varma]: up.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me what that was like.
[Amit Varma]: So that's completely blank.
[Amit Varma]: But I thought, before his memory fades completely, I should sit down and capture some of them.
[Guest]: So I sat down with him with a tape recorder and just recorded a bunch of his memories.
[Amit Varma]: And they were so sharp.
[Amit Varma]: And they were so vivid.
[Amit Varma]: Now, one, what do you feel about the nature of memory?
[Amit Varma]: Like I had a writer called Sarah Rai on the show.
[Amit Varma]: She's also a Hindi novelist, you might have read her, she was Munshi Premchand's...
[Guest]: I was great friends with her older cousin, and her brothers, Sarah's brothers.
[Guest]: They were Premchand's grandchildren.
[Guest]: And Premchand's son, Amrit and Sripad were my mother's contemporaries.
[Guest]: And they used to come to our house in Allahabad, not Sripadji so much, but Amrit Rai was a
[Guest]: frequent visitor.
[Guest]: And his son, Alok Rai was with me in college, we were together in BA and MA, in great competition
[Guest]: between the two of us, who comes first, who comes second.
[Guest]: But he's still a very dear friend.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And both Amrit Rai and Alok Rai, of course, wrote wonderful books on the language Hindi
[Amit Varma]: and the politics around it.
[Amit Varma]: I'll come to that later as well.
[Amit Varma]: But one of the interesting things about Sarah was that she also sort of showed this deep
[Amit Varma]: sense of observation where she had all these really vivid details.
[Amit Varma]: And I asked her that, how do you remember things so vividly?
[Amit Varma]: And she said, Oh, it was, those were dull times, we were bored, we had nothing to do,
[Amit Varma]: but look at things closely.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't entirely buy that.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to kind of ask you that, you know, with your mother being a writer, and you're
[Amit Varma]: looking at her writing, and you're looking at how she describes the world and how she
[Amit Varma]: sees the world, does that change in some way the way you see the world around you?
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, you put an apple in front of five people, they will see it differently.
[Amit Varma]: But perhaps as a writer, do you look at it differently than others?
[Amit Varma]: Is your gaze somewhat different?
[Amit Varma]: And does that gaze then begin to change when you begin to write yourself?
[Amit Varma]: Like you said, you were 20, 21, when you started writing seriously, your short stories and
[Amit Varma]: all that.
[Amit Varma]: So, do you have to train yourself in some way to see a little better?
[Amit Varma]: Do your memories then take on additional tinges because of the act of your remembering them?
[Amit Varma]: Is this something you've kind of thought about?
[Guest]: I mean, so far as memory is concerned, I feel that memory has a lot of lot also to do with
[Guest]: the context in which a particular memory comes to you.
[Guest]: Like I was rereading my mother's Amadir Shantiniketan, which my sister has very beautifully translated
[Guest]: it into English.
[Guest]: So when I was going through the manuscript, then I reread the original many times.
[Guest]: They are such a happy child's memories, you know, a child who was growing up in palaces
[Guest]: and who came to Shantiniketan, Tagore taught her the Bengali alphabet.
[Guest]: She stayed there for 10 years and moved around with the, you know, intellectual elite of
[Guest]: the country and actually global elite.
[Guest]: And then all of a sudden she goes home and she's married off to this man she had never
[Guest]: met who already has lost a wife, brooding and, you know, he's a kind of a very quiet
[Guest]: withdrawn man with a little girl who she has to bring up, gets pregnant all of a sudden.
[Guest]: And yet she could write, you know, fairly bubbly stories.
[Guest]: But now when I reread her, I see a kind of a shadow coming up and then, you know, disappearing
[Guest]: like clouds too in the hills.
[Guest]: So she was a naturally sunny and positive woman.
[Guest]: And she kind of absorbed it all, but didn't let her natural joy of life get clouded by
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: And she used to occasionally tell me, she said, tu sochti bahut ho, itna mat socha karo.
[Guest]: So I said ki main kisi cheez ko jab dekhti hoon, toh phir bahut saari cheezein mann mein
[Guest]: aati hain, toh main sochna multavi nahi kar sakti hoon.
[Guest]: I cannot postpone thinking, I have to think.
[Guest]: And she said, dekho gussa karke kuch nahi hota hai, do teen maar teen ki talwar maine
[Guest]: bhi chalai thi, lekin sansaar nahi badalta hai.
[Guest]: She said, sansaar jo hai, wo jaisa hai, waisa chalta hai, aur hamisha yeh socho ki logon
[Guest]: ki vivasht, sabhavgat vivashtain, she said, you know, that was the word, ki everybody
[Guest]: is born with a certain kind of temperament, which encompasses them.
[Guest]: So whatever they do or say is tempered with that.
[Guest]: And that is how the world has been.
[Guest]: That is how it always will be.
[Guest]: We writers think we can change things.
[Guest]: We cannot.
[Guest]: At best, we can show them for what they are, and we can show them a better world.
[Guest]: But if whether they will like it or not, we cannot say.
[Guest]: So I think I was born in an aura of a period in my mother's life when she was herself very
[Guest]: lost.
[Guest]: You know, I was born a year after she got married.
[Guest]: That must have been a hard year for her, because she came from a very different background
[Guest]: and a very affluent family into this family, which didn't have much money, which was surrounded
[Guest]: by grief of a young wife lost and a little girl who cried all the time for her mother.
[Guest]: And then they were cutter vegetarians, shakahari, veshna.
[Guest]: My mother had grown up in Bengal without mangso maas.
[Guest]: She couldn't conceive of a table without that.
[Guest]: And my grandfather wouldn't even eat onions and garlic.
[Guest]: And he was a swayampaki brahmin till he could manage it.
[Guest]: He used to cook all the meals himself.
[Guest]: And he told my mother, you take care of the kids, I'll cook the food.
[Guest]: And my mother said he was a horrible cook.
[Guest]: And she said, when you were about to be born, I craved so much that I wanted to eat meat
[Guest]: and I wanted to eat a bird.
[Guest]: So my grandmother had sent a cook with her so that he could occasionally cook her something
[Guest]: that she craved.
[Guest]: And she told him ki mujhe bahut meat khaane ka man kar raha hai.
[Guest]: So she said ki we waited till your grandfather had gone to the marketplace to meet his friends.
[Guest]: Then we locked the house from inside.
[Guest]: He caught hold of a pigeon and he killed it.
[Guest]: And then he, you know, sort of cleaned it and quickly roasted it and cooked it with
[Guest]: some gravy.
[Guest]: And I gorged on it.
[Guest]: And she said ki tu tabhi itni tu alag kisam ki nikli hai.
[Guest]: So I said ki agar tu mujhe dhaniya wali sabji khilati toh, shayad main likak nahi banti.
[Guest]: So I think children absorb the period of their mother's life into which they are born.
[Guest]: My younger sister, for example, Ira, was born by the time my parents had come together and,
[Guest]: you know, accepted each other.
[Guest]: My father had learned to smile and laugh again.
[Guest]: You know, my grandmother used to always say ki meri ladki ne tujhko hasna sikha diya.
[Guest]: He had thought that he would, he used to say that he told his father after his first wife
[Guest]: died ki mere bhaagi mein shadi ka sukh nahi hai, main sanyasi ho jata hoon.
[Guest]: So he said ki nahi, is bachchi ka kya hoga, main toh kabhi bhi chala jaunga, is bachchi
[Guest]: ka kaun dekhega aur tumko rehna, iske liye tumko dusri shadi karne padegi.
[Guest]: And when I heard the story, then I really felt terrible that, you know, my mother was
[Guest]: married only because, you know, a woman was required to bring up a child, not because
[Guest]: she was so good.
[Guest]: My mother was a very beautiful woman, you know.
[Guest]: So I said, not because she was beautiful, not because she was educated in Shantiniketan,
[Guest]: not because she came from such a brilliant family of bibliophiles, her grandfather was
[Guest]: one of the co-founders of Kashi Vidya Peeth, but to bring up a sickly child and she just
[Guest]: took it on and she brought my father out of the shadows, so to speak.
[Guest]: And, you know, so Ira, my younger sister, who was born when we were in Shahjahanpur,
[Guest]: was a beautiful, bubbly, happy child.
[Guest]: I never know Eru to have cried as a child.
[Guest]: She was a very cute little round little child with the auburn hair like my mother's and
[Guest]: chinky eyes and everybody loved her because she was so ready to climb in their laps.
[Guest]: And in contrast, I was scrawny and I was always quiet and broody and, you know, curled up
[Guest]: in a corner with a book, avoiding everybody and everything.
[Guest]: So I think children do absorb the vibe.
[Guest]: And my brother was, of course, born when my parents were completely at peace with each
[Guest]: other.
[Guest]: My father was doing very well.
[Guest]: My mother had become a household name.
[Guest]: So he's one of the noblest, gentlest, and at the same time, most relaxed people that
[Guest]: I've come across.
[Guest]: He's had a lot of tough struggle in his life because my father died when he was still at
[Guest]: IIT, but it hasn't scratched his soul at all.
[Guest]: He's still, you know, one of the gentlest and lovable people in the family.
[Guest]: So I think I do believe very strongly that when the mother is expecting a baby, the aura
[Guest]: that she has, the baby is born with that.
[Guest]: And so I have a happy side to me.
[Guest]: I crack jokes, of course, having been born in the Panth family, who doesn't crack jokes?
[Guest]: I crack jokes and I, you know, have fun on Twitter with one-liners and so on.
[Guest]: But there is a part of me which notices little things, which can't help it.
[Guest]: You know, I wish I could help it, but I do, and injustice is at the heart of my preoccupations.
[Guest]: Any kind of gender injustice or even injustice within homes, outside homes, in politics.
[Guest]: This is something that even if I want to stop myself, I cannot.
[Guest]: I have to, you know, one of my mother-in-law's brothers was an astrologer.
[Guest]: And when he saw my horoscope, he told my mother-in-law, this cannot be a woman's horoscope.
[Guest]: She thinks too much and she acts too much and too hard and she'll go very far, but your
[Guest]: son has to be very wary of her because she'll be a very, very much a woman, her own master.
[Guest]: So I don't know, I suppose you come inscribed with certain DNA chains within you, which
[Guest]: makes you the way you are.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm also, you know, struck by that phrase that you mentioned that you were the noticing
[Amit Varma]: kind, you know, there was a noticer there.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I've noticed that when we kind of grow up and come into our own, in my own
[Amit Varma]: life, I look back and I can see that there are many layers that stop you from seeing
[Amit Varma]: things around you.
[Amit Varma]: And gradually, as you grow up, you lose these layers, you know, you could grow up in a very
[Amit Varma]: privileged family, and you don't realize, you know, all the inequities around you and
[Amit Varma]: so on.
[Amit Varma]: And there is a time when you suddenly see that and that layer goes, or you could be
[Amit Varma]: a man, and you may not be aware of what women go through, for example, the fact that a man
[Amit Varma]: can, you know, I can go out for a walk at night, I can enter a lift with five men and
[Amit Varma]: not think about it.
[Amit Varma]: But women always have this extra layer.
[Amit Varma]: And there is this moment when as a man, you become aware of that reality.
[Amit Varma]: And there's another layer.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that, you know, one of the things that surprised me while you were talking
[Amit Varma]: about it, was how when your mother said that, you know, she needs a food to be good, and
[Amit Varma]: your dad was so demanding, and you fought with her, and you said, nahi, nahi, itna effort
[Amit Varma]: kyu daalti ho?
[Amit Varma]: Why are you so stressed about this?
[Amit Varma]: And that's pretty impressive, because elsewhere, you have written about how a lot of women
[Amit Varma]: in India, even today, you know, decades after you fought with your mother, take their place,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in the scheme of things for granted, that layer never falls, they just assume this
[Amit Varma]: is how things are meant to be.
[Amit Varma]: And my chapatis have to be round, and my food has to be tasty, and this is what I do.
[Amit Varma]: And all of that, you know.
[Amit Varma]: The fact that they're almost instrumental for something in the way that you described,
[Amit Varma]: you know, your shock when you realized that your mother was instrumental, that child has
[Amit Varma]: to be brought up.
[Amit Varma]: But you saw that, you saw that you were fighting with your mother, you were saying, yeh nahi
[Amit Varma]: chalega.
[Amit Varma]: And at different parts of your story, you talk about that scene.
[Amit Varma]: One I'm surprised by that scene, because although I have, you know, grown up, a few decades
[Amit Varma]: of three decades after you, perhaps, I didn't see this kind of seeing much around me.
[Amit Varma]: When I grew up, even today, most women may not, you know, necessarily notice this.
[Amit Varma]: So was it because you were, you know, reading a lot, and you were exposed to different kinds
[Amit Varma]: of realities through the books you read, and you realized that it doesn't have to be like
[Amit Varma]: this, there's something else.
[Amit Varma]: And also, what interests me is that, you know, where do you get the frameworks to look at
[Amit Varma]: the world, for example, you know, today, you might have a really evolved feminist framework,
[Amit Varma]: because you've read a lot about feminism, and you know, you can apply that lens to everything.
[Amit Varma]: But when you're a young teenager growing up, and you're telling your mother that, hey,
[Amit Varma]: you don't have to stress out so much about the food.
[Amit Varma]: What framework are you applying?
[Amit Varma]: Are you then curious that what framework do I apply to this to my anger now?
[Amit Varma]: You know, tell me about these processes.
[Guest]: Frankly, I don't logic it out too much, you know, it is what it is.
[Guest]: I always grew up thinking of questions which remained unasked.
[Guest]: I grew up thinking of letters I wanted to write to people, which never got written.
[Guest]: So, a lot of it I locked up inside me, until I found a language, and also a framework to
[Guest]: describe it.
[Guest]: And now that you say a couple of things, you know, like, for example, when I went to Hindi
[Guest]: medium school in Shahjahanpur and in Almora, especially the Arikanya Patshala, I just plunged
[Guest]: into a level of society where people really lived like animals, you know, where children
[Guest]: had parents who beat them black and blue, they didn't have slippers, classrooms didn't
[Guest]: have anything, children dropped out of school very frequently, teachers had grown up as
[Guest]: orphans and they told us, you are so lucky you have two parents, you know, taking care
[Guest]: of you.
[Guest]: And schools which didn't even have clocks to time their lessons with.
[Guest]: And I somehow never forgot that somehow or the other to my child's mind, this was what
[Guest]: the world was also about.
[Guest]: And then I went to the university, and then again, I found that there were circles and
[Guest]: people hung with like-minded and everybody was puzzled why I had opted for Sanskrit and
[Guest]: English.
[Guest]: To my mind, it was a very natural combination, because languages always drew me.
[Guest]: And I wanted to, you know, always take them apart, like a child takes apart a toy, a favorite
[Guest]: toy and try and put it together and then match pieces and then see what happens.
[Guest]: So that was one.
[Guest]: The other was you write books, affected me a lot because I read a great deal.
[Guest]: It's very funny when we were going from, once we were traveling from Jabalpur to Nimaj,
[Guest]: then on the station, on the way in Indore station, I remember there was a wheeler book
[Guest]: stall and I thought I must buy an arm load of books because I'm going to Nimaj which
[Guest]: is back or beyond.
[Guest]: It's a little town and it was a subdivision actually in those days near Chittorgarh.
[Guest]: So I bought a couple of books, among them the Second Sex by Simo Deboer.
[Guest]: Imagine finding it in Indore wheeler stall, and then I started reading it in the train
[Guest]: and it was like, you know, the phrase comes from when you put a lamp next to another lamp,
[Guest]: the flames of the lamp attract each other and they become one.
[Guest]: So Sadhak bhi kehte hai na, usne sadhana ki meditation kiya aur law lag gayi, means you
[Guest]: become one with the subject.
[Guest]: And when I read the Sixth Sense in an English translation, I don't even know if it was a
[Guest]: good translation.
[Guest]: It was as though, you know, all the dots had become connected in my mind and I could see,
[Guest]: you know, and the next trip to Indore, through Indore, I picked up something else.
[Guest]: I think it was early 20th century novel by Bechan Sharma Ugra.
[Guest]: It was called Bijli.
[Guest]: It was about a widow and the ambivalence of a widow's mind, who's attracted to sex and
[Guest]: who is denied sex, at the same time experiences sex within the family and the kind of tension
[Guest]: that goes with it.
[Guest]: And then, you know, a whole new, I had grown up very protected and I never had bad sexual
[Guest]: encounters or, you know, the kind of things that are happening today.
[Guest]: But it was also a very kind of a compartmentalized upbringing.
[Guest]: Slowly the world that I had seen very briefly, but couldn't make sense out of, and the injustices
[Guest]: that had rankled in my mind, not as injustices, but something which didn't fit, they all began
[Guest]: to come together and start making sense.
[Guest]: So it happened from there.
[Guest]: And then soon after Panna, when we went to the USA, that was the wonderful period when
[Guest]: feminism had just come of age.
[Guest]: That was the famous year of the boardwalk here, when women are said to have burnt their
[Guest]: bras.
[Guest]: They actually didn't burn their bras.
[Guest]: The New York Times reporter gave some money to some boardwalkers just to burn some bras
[Guest]: so that he could take photographs and say that women are protesting against being objectified
[Guest]: and burn their bras and so on.
[Guest]: And then the Ms. Magazine came out.
[Guest]: And for some reason, I was put on their mailing list and I got a first copy and of course
[Guest]: I subscribed to it.
[Guest]: And it was wonderful because each article, each issue of Ms. Magazine, again, took me
[Guest]: back to my own experiences and years and slowly things which had rattled me, things which
[Guest]: had enraged me without finding a reason why I was angry, began to make sense, you know,
[Guest]: because if you don't even know what freedom is, how do you ask for it?
[Guest]: Aapko pata hai aap pehda huye hain phalana umar tak aapki shaadi ho jayegi.
[Guest]: It's a given.
[Guest]: So how do you protest in my generation in 1966?
[Guest]: How do you protest against the idea of marriage, which is such a basic idea in a traditional
[Guest]: Indian household?
[Guest]: Hindu, Muslim, Christian, Parsi, Sikh, Isai, everybody, you know, ki ladki badi ho gayi
[Guest]: hai, uski shaadi kar do.
[Guest]: I said, then Arvind just happened to walk into my life at that point.
[Guest]: So people say ki isko to ghar bathe, var mil gaya and things like that.
[Guest]: But still, you know, there's something about marriage as it is structured traditionally
[Guest]: which left me rattled.
[Guest]: For example, for a long time when people called me Mrs. Pandey, I looked around to see who
[Guest]: they were addressing because I was panth.
[Guest]: I'd been Mrinal Panth for 20 years of my life.
[Guest]: And all of a sudden, you know, I had exchanged my surname.
[Guest]: But it was a given before I knew my checkbook was issued in that name and, you know, my
[Guest]: passport was made as Mrinal Pandey.
[Guest]: And so it was, in fact, Kamleshwar wrote me a letter and he said ki Mrinal tum, nahi not
[Guest]: Kamleshwar.
[Guest]: He was another poet friend of mine, Kamlesh, the samajwadi socialist leader.
[Guest]: He said ki tumhare naam Mrinal Panth rhythmic tha, tumne isko Pandey kyun kar diya.
[Guest]: Sir Pandey se shaadi hone se koi panth sunna thodi chhod deta hai.
[Guest]: So that also stuck to my mind, but it was too late for that.
[Guest]: And so little things like that.
[Guest]: Then everybody taking it for granted ki university ki naukri ye chhodegi.
[Guest]: Woh apna career nahi chhodega.
[Guest]: IAS mein hai.
[Guest]: Bhai main bhi Allahabad University un dino achi khasi university hua karti thi.
[Guest]: I have a permanent job at the age of 21.
[Guest]: How can you, you know, accept the fact of my resigning overnight?
[Guest]: But I did.
[Guest]: No questions asked, no regrets, no tears shed.
[Guest]: And there's something not right with this kind of a, why was I making it?
[Guest]: You know, even now I have this terrible habit.
[Guest]: If my husband says something to me, I immediately get up to do it.
[Guest]: And then I give him a big jhaad also.
[Guest]: I said tum mujhe chayan se betha dekh nahi sakte ho.
[Guest]: And he says ki bhaiya maine sir suggest kiya tha, yeh thodi kaha tha ki tum uth ke kadhi
[Guest]: ho jao.
[Guest]: And then I get very angry at myself.
[Guest]: Why do I jump to my feet every time he, you know, tells me to do something.
[Guest]: If I'm coming here and he says ki dekho jab baithoge karma ussi waqt Google map chaloo
[Guest]: kar dena.
[Guest]: And I get very angry at him.
[Guest]: Tum apne ko samajhta hai kya ho ki sir tumhi Google literate ho, sir tumhi ko aata hai digital.
[Guest]: I run a whole paper on digital.
[Guest]: Main yeh nahi keh raha hoon, main sirf yeh keh raha hoon, phone le jaana mat boolna,
[Guest]: tum kahi baad ghar mein chhode jaati hoon.
[Guest]: So you know, a lot of anger comes out in wrong places still, because I've been programmed
[Guest]: in a way, meri hardwiring jo hai, wo badi gadwad hai, lekin mera software farak hai.
[Guest]: Toh yeh problem hai.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, I want to read out this beautiful bit from your book, The Other Country and
[Amit Varma]: kind of then elaborate on that with a bit of a question, where at one point, you write
[Amit Varma]: quote, that is the reason most women find it so hard to create because they are so used
[Amit Varma]: to their lives being shared and end up feeling guilty about not sharing a part of their inside.
[Amit Varma]: But you have to be so if you are driven by the creative bug.
[Amit Varma]: You have to come to the space and only when you have completely dissociated yourself from
[Amit Varma]: everything else, then you have the basic rock under your feet on which you can stand and
[Amit Varma]: start creating something.
[Amit Varma]: I have seen it with my mother, when she was writing, she may sit on the dining table with
[Amit Varma]: all of us running and shouting around.
[Amit Varma]: But we all knew that at that point, she was not available to us.
[Amit Varma]: Some resented it, but I loved it because I knew it was the only thing she was doing for
[Amit Varma]: herself.
[Amit Varma]: And I hate the Indian notion of self sacrifice, stop quote, and such a beautiful quote and
[Amit Varma]: sentiment.
[Amit Varma]: And so I'm wondering about how through this time, your image of yourself was developing
[Amit Varma]: like did you want to did you know you were going to be a writer and a storyteller from
[Amit Varma]: very early and after you got married, even though you know, you left the job and so on
[Amit Varma]: and you went with your husband, were you even then aware that I am not just somebody's wife
[Amit Varma]: or I'm not just somebody's daughter, that this is what I want to do?
[Amit Varma]: How does one's notion of oneself develop at that period of time?
[Amit Varma]: And did you change over a period of time?
[Amit Varma]: Like when you look back to the 21 year old Mrinal, for example, does she seem like you
[Amit Varma]: or does she seem like another person sometimes?
[Guest]: She's partially me, but a she is too angry.
[Guest]: I'm much more mellow now.
[Guest]: I'm much more mellow because I have expressed a lot of my anger logically and purged some
[Guest]: of it through various other things that I have done learning music, for example.
[Guest]: And so she was a lot angrier, a lot thinner, of course, but she I think I have evolved
[Guest]: as a human being.
[Guest]: I wouldn't like to go back to that.
[Guest]: Very often people say I would like to be once again those good old days.
[Guest]: No, I think I am a better person.
[Guest]: And to me, for me, the world is now a better place for one thing, because I got married
[Guest]: young.
[Guest]: We had children young.
[Guest]: They flew the nest pretty young and they were both brilliant students.
[Guest]: So they got fellowships, you know, so they went abroad.
[Guest]: So I have been an empty nester ever since I was in my 40s.
[Guest]: And then I could take on full-fledged editorships and also continue to write and travel.
[Guest]: I find that the great thing denied women is mobility.
[Guest]: Without mobility, you cannot write.
[Guest]: Stories must run within you as you move about and collect, you know, you gather sorrows,
[Guest]: you gather whatever, but you have to be mobile and mobility is denied to women.
[Guest]: And I felt terribly constrained when I got married because all of a sudden I was SDM
[Guest]: Sahib's wife.
[Guest]: I was the collector Sahib's wife and it was my deemed duty to, you know, serve big lunches
[Guest]: and community dinners and packed picnics and, you know, and talk to foolish women, you know,
[Guest]: and equally foolish pompous men.
[Guest]: I've never really been one for suffering fools gladly.
[Guest]: When I was unmarried and living on my own, I could just dismiss them out of my life and
[Guest]: curl up with a book.
[Guest]: But as, you know, as an official's wife, you have certain duties which you need to pursue.
[Guest]: Fortunately, you know, we traveled so much and then we lived abroad for a couple of years.
[Guest]: So that part wore out, but still it irritated me to have things expected of me.
[Guest]: My husband came from a long line of bureaucrats and my mother-in-law was an ideal wife in
[Guest]: that sense.
[Guest]: She was a very, very nice person, a really good woman, but terribly unsure of herself,
[Guest]: very insecure and totally, totally devoted wife and mother.
[Guest]: And her entire personality, her entire sense of self was, you know, contained in this.
[Guest]: And I thought I was a wife and a mother, you know, almost by accident, but there was a
[Guest]: core me, which was left dry.
[Guest]: And I, probably not wanting to do that, I hurt her and a couple of other relatives whom
[Guest]: I loved and admired a lot by just throwing caution to wind and plunging headlong into
[Guest]: what I wanted to do.
[Guest]: For example, after the emergency, during the emergency, I was interacting with all the
[Guest]: writers.
[Guest]: I mean, Arun Shourie was a very good friend.
[Guest]: We had met and made friends with them in Washington and Kamlesh, the poet and host of Samajwadi
[Guest]: Party people.
[Guest]: And so I helped them put together an anthology of protest poetry in the section I translated.
[Guest]: And then I, when they created the manifesto, Arun came to me and he said,
[Guest]: So anyway, so jokes apart, but, you know, I was beginning to enjoy myself.
[Guest]: I was involved in something above kitchen and children and the same, but it took a toll
[Guest]: in the sense that my daughters were made to feel again by relatives, that their mother
[Guest]: was not there for them 24-7.
[Guest]: And you know, when we were in Bhopal, one day my children came home, my mother-in-law
[Guest]: was also there.
[Guest]: And my older daughter said, I said, I hate knitting because as a child, I remember everybody
[Guest]: knitting and I thought it was such mindless activity.
[Guest]: She said, today the teacher asked us whose school sweaters have been knitted by their
[Guest]: mothers.
[Guest]: Everybody's hand went up except mine.
[Guest]: So my mother-in-law immediately said,
[Guest]: So I said, that's not the point, Mami, she said,
[Guest]: And she was so sweet, she knitted, immediately she knit very fast and she immediately produced
[Guest]: before she left for the hills, two beautiful sweaters for my daughters.
[Guest]: But I said, why should they want to be counted with those children?
[Guest]: Didn't they know that their mother was different?
[Guest]: Anyway, as usual, I never said anything on this call and maybe yelled at Arvind some.
[Guest]: Then we came to Delhi and they went to the modern school.
[Guest]: And then again, then I was appearing in television.
[Guest]: I was doing a program called Chakravyuh and, you know, participating in another program
[Guest]: for another TV serial.
[Guest]: And these were all discussion-based programs.
[Guest]: Then I was also frequently appearing in panel discussions and I had definite political opinions,
[Guest]: which were always, you know, sort of somewhat sharp.
[Guest]: And my older daughter used to get very angry and she said,
[Guest]: Do you know that the next day all the children say, your mother said this, your mother said
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: Why do you have to go public?
[Guest]: So I said, I have to go public because I am what I am.
[Guest]: I'm not just your mother.
[Guest]: She said, but you have to recall that you are our mother and we have to listen to all
[Guest]: that crap from our classmates.
[Guest]: So I said, please tell your classmates, I was not born to be only your mother.
[Guest]: I was also born as a human being and I spent 21 years being what I am myself.
[Guest]: So my relationship with my older daughter remained strained.
[Guest]: The younger one was of course like Ira, you know, happy-go-lucky child, because, you know,
[Guest]: she said, haan tum jo karti ho karo, but when we are home, then I just like to have you
[Guest]: around.
[Guest]: That's all.
[Guest]: And so that was that.
[Guest]: But they were very conscious of the fact, in fact, when they came home for vacations,
[Guest]: if they wanted, I said, ki beta tumko shopping ke liye jaana hai, come I'll drive you.
[Guest]: They said nahi hum tumhare saath nahi jaayenge, because everybody then comes to you, ki aap
[Guest]: Mrinal ji hai na, aapne TV mein wo wala show kiya tha na, aap kal hamne dekha tha na.
[Guest]: She said, that's very irritating.
[Guest]: So I stopped going out.
[Guest]: My daughter, who's a doctor, the older one, she had her convocation and I told her, ki
[Guest]: tumne mujhe kabhi nahi aane diya, not even for your admission, let me come this once
[Guest]: for your convocation.
[Guest]: She said, accha, theek hai, aajana.
[Guest]: So Arvind and I were sitting in the back row, hoping that nobody would notice us.
[Guest]: And then the director of the Malan Azad College noticed me and he walked to me and he said,
[Guest]: ki, you are Mrinal Pandey?
[Guest]: How come you are here?
[Guest]: So I said, my daughter's getting the degree today.
[Guest]: She said, which one?
[Guest]: I said, Radhika Pandey.
[Guest]: He said, she never told me.
[Guest]: She was my student for five years.
[Guest]: She never told me that you were her mother.
[Guest]: I said, I'm glad that she didn't because I said, nahi, children don't like non-pay.
[Guest]: He said, I would have invited you for a function and you could have talked to our children
[Guest]: about literature and journalism.
[Guest]: But that's exactly what my children did not want.
[Guest]: So that was one big lesson I learned that I probably got a lot out of those years, but
[Guest]: it did take its toll on my children who were mercilessly ribbed by their classmates and
[Guest]: maybe called names and maybe got singled out, you know.
[Guest]: So hota hai.
[Guest]: I think people have paid for my independence and I have also probably ruffled many feathers
[Guest]: which I didn't want to because I really loved, especially Arvind's family, one of the gentlest
[Guest]: and really affectionate people.
[Guest]: But unknowingly because I was like a, you know, wild bird and I wanted to fly and nothing
[Guest]: could hold me back.
[Guest]: And it's to, I think Arvind's great credit that he never turned a hair.
[Guest]: He's the only person in my life, other than my mother, who just accepted me as I was.
[Guest]: Even now he laughs at it, but he has never once, you know, said ki tum yeh kyun kar rahi
[Guest]: ho.
[Guest]: So I once told him, I said ki tumko pata hai ki jab Ganga ne Shantanu se shadi ki thi,
[Guest]: toh Shantanu se usne kaha ki main tum se shadi sirf is condition par karungi, ki main jo
[Guest]: bhi karungi, toh you will never ask me kyun main yeh kyun kar rahi hoon.
[Guest]: The moment you ask me, I will go back.
[Guest]: And she drowned seven of her children when she was drowning the eighth child.
[Guest]: He said ek bachcha toh nahi drown karti, toh usne usko diya, kaha ki iska durbhagi tum
[Guest]: apni aak se dekhna and then she flew away.
[Guest]: And that child was Bhishma Pitamah.
[Guest]: So you know, I said ki main jo bhi kar rahi hoon, bhale ke liye kar rahi hoon, kabhi tum
[Guest]: se cheat nahi karungi, kabhi family se disloyal nahi hongi, but I have to do it.
[Guest]: It's like, you know, Audubon's duck, he, Audubon, the famous ornithologist had clipped the rings
[Guest]: of a duck to see if a duck deprived of her feathers would still try and fly when the
[Guest]: call came.
[Guest]: And he noticed that with bleeding sides, the duck was walking in the direction in which
[Guest]: other ducks were gathering to fly away to their migratory land.
[Guest]: So I said, I'm like Audubon's duck, I have to walk and you have to put up with it.
[Guest]: So I think it's a kind of a wild call and you can't stop it.
[Guest]: Now, of course, you know, just the two of us, and I just sit in my reading room, everybody
[Guest]: in the house knows, you know, the Jhaadu Poche Wali knows ki woh likh rahi hai, editorial
[Guest]: likh rahi hongi, she says, kamra chod deti hai, the cook knows better than to talk to
[Guest]: me when I'm there.
[Guest]: Everybody has accepted the fact, but I still sometimes feel very sorry for my children.
[Guest]: You know, they did probably miss out on what a lot of other children had in their time,
[Guest]: you know, the proximity to mother, a mother who hugged and kissed tears away, but I was
[Guest]: always too blunt and too fair.
[Guest]: So they grew up in a house where everybody was a bureaucrat.
[Guest]: And it was all, you know, basically a one party loyalty.
[Guest]: And you know, when I was on TV, then I would criticize quite frankly, whatever was happening.
[Guest]: And my children felt I was being disloyal to the family, which I was not.
[Guest]: You can be fond of the family, you can respect the family, but your views are your own, you
[Guest]: know, author's views are her own.
[Guest]: So I but I do feel guilty about that, that guilt I carry on me.
[Guest]: And though my younger daughter tells me, you grew up with a guilt and you want a guilt
[Guest]: because without a guilt, you feel light, yeh bhi ho sakta hai.
[Guest]: But I do think I was not a mother like other mothers.
[Guest]: My sisters are good mothers.
[Guest]: They're very good husbands, they're very house proud women, they come to my house and first
[Guest]: thing they do is to run their finger on my furniture and say, dekho dust, tumhari ghar
[Guest]: mein har jagah dust.
[Guest]: I say, chhodo yaar, mujhko toh nahin dikhayi deti.
[Guest]: So there is a template in which we were programmed.
[Guest]: I was also programmed, I'm still hardwired for that.
[Guest]: But I broke the template.
[Guest]: And I changed from analogue to digital.
[Guest]: And you know, so that technicality took away a lot.
[Amit Varma]: I also think we judge ourselves too harshly, sometimes, as you might be doing, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned being a mother and what that was like.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to read out this wonderful paragraph I spotted in your book, which I really liked
[Amit Varma]: about the quiet rage of women where you write, quote, some 20 years ago, I remember sitting
[Amit Varma]: with colleagues in the staff room of a woman's college in Delhi, the newspapers had reported
[Amit Varma]: the story of a Delhi woman who had murdered her baby, a third or fourth daughter in the
[Amit Varma]: hospital where she gave birth and tried to pass it off as death caused by unknown factors.
[Amit Varma]: I remember clearly we all sided instinctively with the harried woman.
[Amit Varma]: Then we began to swap our own memories that the episode had unleashed memories of suddenly
[Amit Varma]: venting our frustrations on our uncomprehending young ones, because they alone were close
[Amit Varma]: by at a time when we were feeling totally low and marginalized and abandoned.
[Amit Varma]: We were bitter, witty, funny by turns as we recited our pieces.
[Amit Varma]: But one after another, we all confessed to having nursed a gut churning rage at one time
[Amit Varma]: or another for having become just another faceless, taken for granted and perennially
[Amit Varma]: exhausted custodian of young children, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought I'd read it out vis a vis nothing for my listeners, because it's such a lovely
[Amit Varma]: paragraph.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a quick commercial break and we'll talk some more when we come back.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, chances are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut,
[Amit Varma]: which was active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time.
[Amit Varma]: I love the freedom the form gave me, and I feel I was shaped by it in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced to think about many different things
[Amit Varma]: because I wrote about many different things.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons, and now it is time to revive it.
[Amit Varma]: Only now I'm doing it through a newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com, where I will write
[Amit Varma]: regularly about whatever catches my fancy.
[Amit Varma]: I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else.
[Amit Varma]: So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe.
[Amit Varma]: It is free.
[Amit Varma]: Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So subscribe now for free.
[Amit Varma]: The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I have the great honor of chatting with Menal Pandey on my show today.
[Amit Varma]: In your book, The Other India, you had quoted this beautiful poem by Sujata Bhatt, and I'll
[Amit Varma]: just quote a bit of that and then go on to my next question.
[Amit Varma]: And the poem goes, You ask me what I mean by saying I have lost my tongue.
[Amit Varma]: I ask you what would you do if you had two tongues in your mouth and lost the first one,
[Amit Varma]: the mother tongue, and could not really know the other, the foreign tongue, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I found this very moving, because I think this is a situation with a lot of us Indians,
[Amit Varma]: who despite having the great privilege to be born in a place where we are surrounded
[Amit Varma]: by this multiplicity of tongues, even within a small area, you'll have so many dialects,
[Amit Varma]: so many flavors, but then we kind of get used to one.
[Amit Varma]: And also in your book, you you wrote and again, I'll quote, quote, the known Indian culture
[Amit Varma]: has always harbored within itself, numerous unknown but clearly and irreducibly identifiable
[Amit Varma]: cultures, each drawing its unique strength from its vernacular and dialects.
[Amit Varma]: The populous Hindi speaking belt in the north is a good example of how each culture will
[Amit Varma]: absorb the outside culture, localizes form and ideas and create unique hybrid.
[Amit Varma]: The Hindi speaking area comprises no less than 11 states of India, and it's richly layered
[Amit Varma]: culture has thrived on multiple variations of Hindi that constantly borrows words and
[Amit Varma]: phrases from its neighbor.
[Amit Varma]: And then you sort of give many examples of that.
[Amit Varma]: I find this fascinating in a number of different ways.
[Amit Varma]: One, I think as you know, someone who's lived in cities all his life, who's been part of
[Amit Varma]: an English speaking elite, I think there is a wealth that is just lost to me out there
[Amit Varma]: because you know, I haven't really been exposed to it so much.
[Amit Varma]: The other thing I realized when I did my recent episode with Sarah Rai is that when we spoke
[Amit Varma]: of her literary influences, every time she named an English book, I had read it.
[Amit Varma]: Every time she named a Hindi book, I hadn't read it and part of the time I hadn't even
[Amit Varma]: heard about it, which is a matter of great shame for me also.
[Amit Varma]: So one, how was it for you to kind of soak in all these different languages and make
[Amit Varma]: the choices that you made about what do I write in, like a friend of mine who wants
[Amit Varma]: to write in Kannada, but he wants to write in a dialect of Kannada that is not the mainstream
[Amit Varma]: Kannada.
[Amit Varma]: So he was asking me the other day that what should I do?
[Amit Varma]: Should I write in that dialect, which very few people may read?
[Amit Varma]: Or should I write in the mainstream?
[Amit Varma]: And I don't have an answer to give him because one part of me wants to say be authentic to
[Amit Varma]: yourself.
[Amit Varma]: But the other part of me also says, what's the point if no one's going to read you?
[Amit Varma]: So are these questions that you have thought about, I mean, arising from this, I have other
[Amit Varma]: questions also based on language and language diversity and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But first, at a personal level, is this something that you've thought about?
[Guest]: How have you navigated these?
[Guest]: Yes, this is something that you have to come to terms when you start writing full time.
[Guest]: And when you take to writing, then you also have to realize, if you are attracted to other
[Guest]: art forms, you must also delve in them to see if they balance out your craving for writing.
[Guest]: But you then find out what your true vocation is, whether you want to be a singer, whether
[Guest]: you want to be a dancer, whether you want to be a writer, or whether you want to be
[Guest]: a painter.
[Guest]: I have delved in all the four areas.
[Guest]: And each time I came to the point and realized that the one media that chose me and that
[Guest]: I would choose again and again, for expressing myself is writing.
[Guest]: Having done that, then the question of language was an easy one for me to tackle because Hindi
[Guest]: was a language that I grew up speaking, and I'm so comfortable in it, I can toss it up,
[Guest]: I can play with it, I can, like a kitten plays with a ball of wool, I can swim in it, I can
[Guest]: dive in it, I can, you know, do whatever I like, and it will still be my Hindi.
[Guest]: A mistake a lot of people make about Hindi is, I don't know about Kannada because I don't
[Guest]: speak Kannada, but in Hindi, there are myriad kinds of Hindi because of the 11 states which
[Guest]: list Hindi as their mother tongue.
[Guest]: The common Hindi is the Hindi we learn in school, but the Hindi we speak to our people
[Guest]: at home is flecked with the dialects in the area.
[Guest]: For example, in Bihar, the Hindi is also closely aligned with the Bengali confusion over gender.
[Guest]: So aunga, jaunga, aungi, jaungi, you know, male-female genderization is often missing.
[Guest]: At the same time, they have certain facility for appropriating words from English, for
[Guest]: example.
[Guest]: Just a vocal, to be vocal about local.
[Guest]: They have quite a beautiful word called bhokal, jo se halda machado, a chalo yaar bhokal karte
[Guest]: hai.
[Guest]: So, I think there are various kinds of Hindis and it depends on what you are trying to express
[Guest]: and where your story is located.
[Guest]: One of my novels, Patrangpur Puran, it's a microcosm of the macrocosm that the country
[Guest]: is, but the base is a very small town in the hills in Uttarakhand, close to the area that
[Guest]: I grew up in.
[Guest]: And we grew up speaking Hindi in school there, but even the school Hindi was flecked with
[Guest]: the local usage of the Kumaoni, which we spoke with our grandmother and our cousins.
[Guest]: So you can easily link the two.
[Guest]: For example, people use, jaise aisa toh hoga hi Hindi mein hum kahenge, but in Kumaoni Hindi
[Guest]: we'll say, aisa toh hone hi wala hua.
[Guest]: You know, see the tonality is different and, you know, there's this friend of mine who
[Guest]: was reciting, Ghalib, chand tasveer-e-buta, chand hasino ke khutoot, baad marne ke mere
[Guest]: ghar se yahi sama nikla.
[Guest]: So he said, chand tasveer-e-buta, chand hasino ke khutoot, mere marne ke baad mere ghar se
[Guest]: yahi nikla thera.
[Guest]: So, you know, Ghalib ki aapne tang tod di, lekin aapne usko ek nahi tarah ki boli mein
[Guest]: apni taraf se salam kar diya.
[Guest]: Toh ye cheez mujhe bahut rejhati hai.
[Guest]: Aisi jo bridge se list Hindi hai, aatiya jaatiya jo sansa hai, unke bina sab gal ki fansa hai.
[Guest]: You know, Bharatindu Harishchand's Hindi.
[Guest]: He says ki there are barah tarah, this is 1873 ke aas paas ki, unha lekhaya ki kam se
[Guest]: kam barah tarah ki Hindiya mein janta hu, unha list kiye usme ek railway wali Hindi
[Guest]: hai.
[Guest]: Railway.
[Guest]: Railway wali Hindi hai, jo Anglo-Indian guard babu log bolte hai, usme angrezi shabdon
[Guest]: ki bharmaar rehti hai.
[Guest]: So, people have for the past 70 years played with Hindi.
[Guest]: Because Hindi as we know it and it is taught in the Nagri script, was actually created
[Guest]: for the British for helping them bring out their papers for the natives in the local
[Guest]: vernacular language acceptable all across.
[Guest]: And they found that among the Muslims, Urdu script, the Rekhta, and in Hindi, the Nagri
[Guest]: script fitted.
[Guest]: So, they got four bhakha munshis, Lallulal and Mir Muhammad, you know, the four clerics
[Guest]: that they selected, who then borrowed the kind of a infrastructure of the language from
[Guest]: west, because they all came from Agra side.
[Guest]: And then they created the script for it in Nagri borrowing from Sanskrit.
[Guest]: And then they brought out a new version, which they called Hindi.
[Guest]: By then the British had realized that if you can segregate Hindus and Muslims by language,
[Guest]: then your game is done.
[Guest]: Because then Hindus will realize they are numerically so much larger.
[Guest]: Muslims will realize that Hindus pose a challenge with their now new textbooks.
[Guest]: And more schools for Hindus, because they were numerically large, will be perceived
[Guest]: by the Muslims as posing a threat to the Madarsas.
[Guest]: So they got this whole thing in order.
[Guest]: And this is precisely what is being done today on a different scale.
[Guest]: You know, you are talking about caste enumeration.
[Guest]: So that, you know, the OBCs come to see, you know, Netish Kumar and the OBC group are keen
[Guest]: on an enumeration by caste primarily because they know and all of us know that OBCs are
[Guest]: the largest group.
[Guest]: But once that happens, then there will be a polarization of the non-OBC castes.
[Guest]: And then the non-OBC castes will then tell the Dalits and the Scheduled Tribes, ki dekho
[Guest]: tumhare baasi bhaat mein khuda ka saajha, they are going to get a piece of, bigger piece
[Guest]: of the pie and cut down on your privileges that the original constitution gave you.
[Guest]: And this is again a vote bank creation.
[Guest]: And then it was, of course, divide and rule.
[Guest]: So this is something unnatural because language is being driven not by the compulsions of
[Guest]: writing but by political compulsions.
[Guest]: And it leads to chimeras and hybrids, which nobody really can do creative work in.
[Guest]: And so unfortunately what we have seen happen after Hindi and Urdu were forcibly separated,
[Guest]: I mean Hindi is a phonetic language.
[Guest]: So I have grown up reading the Kalams of all the greats in Urdu in Nagri because it can
[Guest]: with the use of Nukhta, it can beautifully represent exactly what was written.
[Guest]: And this has been diluted a great deal to the extent that Hindi has moved to Sanskrit.
[Guest]: One of the first things that was done when the governments changed was there was a purification
[Guest]: movement to peel off all Urdu and Arabic words from Hindi and make it pure and take it closer
[Guest]: to Sanskrit, which is impossible because Hindi and Urdu have both been fed much more by dialects
[Guest]: than by either Sanskrit or by English or by Persian.
[Guest]: Persian was the language of the courts, but the people around Lalkhila and Agra and Mathura
[Guest]: and all spoke a variety of Hindi flecked with Brij or Awadhi or whatever, even Punjabi because
[Guest]: a lot of Bigmats in the harem were Punjabi speaking.
[Guest]: So the languages are public property.
[Guest]: I mean the great grammarian Panini says that the only Praman, the only Kasauti, the only
[Guest]: measure for language is the people because it is created by people over a period of many
[Guest]: years.
[Guest]: You cannot ask a poet, even a good poet to create a new word just as you can ask a potter
[Guest]: to create a new pot.
[Guest]: But potter can create a new pot for you, but the writer cannot create a new word for you.
[Guest]: The word has to come from the common pool of the languages.
[Guest]: So I think what is happening is unfortunately in case of Hindi because most of India's Prime
[Guest]: Ministers and Power Ministers and a large part of the Parliament has come from the Hindi
[Guest]: belt.
[Guest]: It has become quite dominantly North centric and there is a point in the Southern States
[Guest]: feeling that although they are far more progressive, they are always outvoted and outnumbered by
[Guest]: the North.
[Guest]: And also for Bengalis to feel that although their literacy levels are high, they are very
[Guest]: creative and brilliant in so many fields.
[Guest]: Bengali doesn't get its due as much as Hindi does because it also has political patronage.
[Guest]: So I feel that this whole debate about Raj Bhasha, Rashtra Bhasha is senseless because
[Guest]: after all you are not creating, you cannot, a government order cannot create a language
[Guest]: overnight.
[Guest]: I mean Lallu Lal's Fort William Hindi was knocked down by people overnight and they
[Guest]: made fun of it, you know, in old Banaras, there were hosts of writers who wrote against
[Guest]: it and who made fun of it and said that these words are like the stones of the river, for
[Guest]: centuries the water of the river makes them round and round, you want to make them overnight
[Guest]: and then the boys are dying in the madrasas and the children of our Hindus are dying in
[Guest]: the schools.
[Guest]: So why not let them flow?
[Guest]: So language is a free floating, free flowing entity and if you try to trifle with it and
[Guest]: this is also caught Hindi in a kind of a peculiar situation where a lot of very mediocre to
[Guest]: third rate writers who write on politically correct subjects are getting, you know, hyped
[Guest]: up way beyond their measure and really good writing in Hindi is being discussed the least
[Guest]: in the Hindi belt and of course nationally also.
[Guest]: And also I find that the Hindi belt because it was subject to so many political pulls
[Guest]: and pressures at some point around the 80s chose to de-link itself from Hindi, so after
[Guest]: the 80s you seldom meet a middle class professional who has consciously chosen to send his or
[Guest]: her children to a Hindi medium school.
[Guest]: Now when we were in government school, it was 50-50, 50% of the children came from the
[Guest]: poorer, lower middle classes or really poor part of the society, but 50% children came
[Guest]: from normal middle class families and because their parents had some vision, some voice
[Guest]: and they also had some attachment to Gandhian values and so on, they would keep in touch
[Guest]: with teachers, monitor their children's Hindi.
[Guest]: Now you hardly come across young parents who can monitor their children's Hindi homework.
[Guest]: In fact, even when we were in Bhopal in the 80s, early 80s, one of the fellow, one of
[Guest]: the colleagues one day called me up and you know, it's the utter crassness of the upper
[Guest]: middle classes and the Indian bureaucracy.
[Guest]: He rings me up and he says, I have heard that you write in Hindi as well, so I said, no,
[Guest]: I write in Hindi only.
[Guest]: So he said, very good, capital.
[Guest]: Then what we'll do is we'll send our children to you for Hindi homework and for learning
[Guest]: Hindi, of course we'll pay for it.
[Guest]: I told him, I'm sorry, I'm not in this game at all.
[Guest]: He said, no, no, don't feel embarrassed about being paid.
[Guest]: It's a very good job.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, my wife and I are not Hindi speakers and we don't know where to start
[Guest]: and I noticed your children are doing very well in school.
[Guest]: So I said, that's because they're doing well on their own.
[Guest]: Their mother is hardly there for them.
[Guest]: But I'm sorry, I don't take tutorials.
[Guest]: And this was such a jolt to me.
[Guest]: And I said, what you write in Hindi night and day is associated with a class which would
[Guest]: do anything for money or for power, whatever.
[Guest]: And this again, I'm in a unique position to observe with a degree of anger and also resentment.
[Guest]: How dare you?
[Guest]: The same thing happened when I joined Hindi newspapers.
[Guest]: The same houses which bring out an English paper and a Hindi paper up until the 21st
[Guest]: century treated their Hindi papers like rags.
[Guest]: They were there just for tax purposes.
[Guest]: They were heavily cross-subsidized.
[Guest]: The marketing forces didn't go out into the market and sell space aggressively, even though
[Guest]: they were selling in multiples of the English newspapers that they were bringing out.
[Guest]: But they were very apologetic about having a Hindi, what they called, product.
[Guest]: So very often I would bring my grief and my anger home.
[Guest]: And Arvind would say, tumko kyun acharaj hota hai?
[Guest]: Tum jaanti ho is tarah ke logon mein hum log milte rehte hain?
[Guest]: Do you think they are sensitive to these things?
[Guest]: They are not.
[Guest]: And the whole managerial class comes from that same gene pool.
[Guest]: And they all have school tie connects.
[Guest]: So the editor comes from the same class.
[Guest]: The marketing manager and his carders come from the same class.
[Guest]: And the ad agency people come from the same class.
[Guest]: And so there is a kind of an unsaid understanding.
[Guest]: You talk to them, they'll be very logical and very nice.
[Guest]: Oh, how nice you write in Hindi.
[Guest]: You know, like somebody said, a woman writing is like a dog walking on two hind legs.
[Guest]: So it's like that.
[Guest]: You are, you know, so and so and you write in Hindi.
[Guest]: How nice.
[Guest]: How very nice.
[Guest]: You know, it's like, feel like slapping their face.
[Guest]: And they pat themselves on the back for saying how nice also.
[Guest]: And then at some day, they'll suddenly call up and say ki, suno bhai, tum kisi ko jaanti
[Guest]: ho?
[Guest]: I had written some novels about Mufasal's when I was nearing retirement, usko translate
[Guest]: karana hai.
[Guest]: So I say, I, earlier I used to bang the phone down.
[Guest]: Now I say ki, haan, mai jaanti toh hoon, lekin aap kya rate denge unko?
[Guest]: So they say ki, haan, Hindi mein kya rate hai?
[Guest]: So I said ki, a rupee a word, ye toh bahut zyada hai.
[Guest]: So I said, take it or leave it.
[Guest]: Acha, theek hai, mai sochta hoon, naam mujhe bhej do, telephone number mujhe bhej do.
[Guest]: So you know, it's like that.
[Guest]: So even my staff, I noticed they were being paid wages which were almost equivalent to
[Guest]: the wages being paid to the lowest people in the English newspapers.
[Guest]: So I fought and I fought and I fought and I got all the salaries hiked.
[Guest]: I got the paper redesigned.
[Guest]: With the result, our revenues went up, our circulation went up several fold.
[Guest]: When I took up, the Delhi edition was selling 48,000 copies a day.
[Guest]: When I left, it was selling upwards of a million and a total circulation, we had 17 editions,
[Guest]: they were selling upwards of 5 million.
[Guest]: So I was telling it to another friend of ours, who's a big name in the corporate circles.
[Guest]: And he said, Munal, tum jaanti hoon ek million kitna hota hai?
[Guest]: I said, nahi ji, main toh padhi likhi nahi hoon, aap bataye ek million kitna hota hai?
[Guest]: And he failed to get the joke, he said, 10 lakh.
[Guest]: You mean to say ki Hindi ka akhbar 5 crore bikta hai?
[Guest]: Maine kha huzoor, 5 crore nahi, 10 crore bhi bik sakta hai.
[Guest]: So he said, nahi, nahi, you got the numbers wrong.
[Guest]: He just wouldn't believe me.
[Guest]: So now I see him sitting on television panels and waxing eloquent about how the government
[Guest]: is doing good to Indian bhashas and you know, he wrote a play, he had the gall to call me
[Guest]: up five years ago and say, I've written a beautiful play on Meera, can you translate
[Guest]: it into Hindi?
[Guest]: I can't give it to an unknown person.
[Guest]: So I said, I'm sorry, I don't do that kind of shitty job.
[Guest]: So you know, the crassness of our power class enrages me.
[Guest]: But then do I fall in the lap of the other class, which is promoting Hindi so vociferously
[Guest]: and you know, I can't, I can't bring myself to do either, you know.
[Guest]: So I just curl up inside and I write and I don't think about the audiences I'm writing
[Guest]: for.
[Guest]: I'm sure it will get its audiences.
[Guest]: If not today, another day, some later date, but it will.
[Guest]: It's like putting a note in a bottle and just throwing it in the sea.
[Guest]: Someday somebody will read it and someday somebody will realize this was happening.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to read out another bit from one of your pieces where you speak about language
[Amit Varma]: based racism, where you write, quote, contrary to his usual manifestations in racist countries,
[Amit Varma]: language based racism in India has a benign but no less lethal form.
[Amit Varma]: It is not violent, does not lead to housing or job discrimination.
[Amit Varma]: But it quietly ensures that while discussing the hiring or training of personnel, or the
[Amit Varma]: promotion and observance of ethics in the public space, only those who are proficient
[Amit Varma]: in English may call the shots, dictate terms and set priorities.
[Amit Varma]: I've known a lot of academicians and journalists who seriously believe that because they are
[Amit Varma]: eminent intellectuals, they cannot be racist, as if being the one automatically rules out
[Amit Varma]: the other.
[Amit Varma]: In seminars and workshops, most of the time worthy speakers will denounce sexism, communalism,
[Amit Varma]: casteism and regionalism and empathize the need to retain our cultural roots.
[Amit Varma]: When the question and answer session begins, I hear them use socialism and feminism as
[Amit Varma]: a disclaimer against charges of social segregation.
[Amit Varma]: And I know the questioner is being sold a ticket.
[Amit Varma]: It is a lot easier listening to the religious fundamentalists who claim they have found
[Amit Varma]: the right path, but they at least acknowledge to have earlier been on the wrong one, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote, and what you said earlier about, you know, like, one of the things I love about
[Amit Varma]: languages is that they cannot be designed by central committee, like you said, they're
[Amit Varma]: delightful khichris, and even Sanskrit, like one of the books I really enjoyed reading
[Amit Varma]: this year was Wanderer's King's Merchants by Peggy Mohan, where she talks about...
[Guest]: Yes, it's wonderful.
[Guest]: In fact, during the COVID, two COVID years, Peggy wrote and asked me, I said, I'd be delighted.
[Guest]: So we had a long conversation about this book, and it was such a delight to read this book.
[Guest]: I've long admired Peggy's book.
[Guest]: And I had been, I was telling her, I had been doing similar things.
[Guest]: Because when you are by yourself, you read a lot of stuff you'd been meaning to read,
[Guest]: but had not had time to really delve into.
[Guest]: And I had gone back to earlier story forms, and I discovered that Buddhists, Jainis, and
[Guest]: even the Panchatantra, Vishnu Sharma, teachers of tales, they were wonderful writers.
[Guest]: And they had a very different style of very different frame and a very different infrastructure
[Guest]: for stories, which move in a kind of a circle.
[Guest]: And then each circle has a tail at the end, to which you hook another circle.
[Guest]: So in the end, you get a chain of stories, which you can read singly, or you can read
[Guest]: as a long chain.
[Guest]: And the whole thing is life itself.
[Guest]: So the stories are, you know, they cancel out each other, they support each other.
[Guest]: Sometimes they call out for each other.
[Guest]: But the whole cycle, you read it, and then in a Panchatantra, for example, it's all based
[Guest]: on animals talking to each other.
[Guest]: But the lessons which blink behind like cursors can be taken forward.
[Guest]: So I then started rereading fables and children's folktales.
[Guest]: The first port of call was of course, A.K Ramanujam's wonderful folktales.
[Guest]: Then I came across, you know, I had many compilations of Kumaoni folktales, of course, curtsy my
[Guest]: mother.
[Guest]: But then I came across a very interesting compilation of folktales from Kumaon by a
[Guest]: Russian who was traveling through India in the 18th century spying on the British, but
[Guest]: he happened to visit villages in Uttarakhand, which people seldom visited, even the British.
[Guest]: And he slept and lived with the outcasts, the Dalits, which were numerically very small.
[Guest]: They had very different folktales and very different gods.
[Guest]: So these folktales are so different from them.
[Guest]: And a cousin of mine who's a linguist had translated them into flawless Hindi from the
[Guest]: original Russian.
[Guest]: So then I discovered a whole new form.
[Guest]: And then I have this equally crazy friend who runs a blog called Janki Pul.
[Guest]: It's a site actually, and he publishes stories and so on.
[Guest]: So I wrote my first story in this new format, and I sent to him and I said, Prabhatji, main
[Guest]: bhej sakti hoon, aap dekh lijiye, atpatti toh hai, maybe you might like.
[Guest]: He was very happy.
[Guest]: He said, look, you know, it looks like a folktale.
[Guest]: It speaks to you like a child, but when you actually analyze it, it really destroys you
[Guest]: and a lot of things inside you because it is so full and it is also so contemporary.
[Guest]: So I wrote 26 or 27 such stories.
[Guest]: They're coming out, they're bringing out an anthology of those.
[Guest]: And it's titled Maya Ne Ghumayo.
[Guest]: It's one of the folk songs that one of the lovers in one story sings.
[Guest]: It says ki we were like logs of wood thrown into a hill river and we started somewhere
[Guest]: and have ended somewhere else.
[Guest]: It's Maya which has taken us here all along.
[Guest]: So this is what I realized at the last decade of my life, that it's a grand spectacle that
[Guest]: you see unfurl before you and it is timeless.
[Guest]: The characters may change.
[Guest]: Then I started thinking about Ramayana, I started thinking about Mahabharata, then I
[Guest]: started re-reading Odysseus and the beautiful recounting of Odysseus by this Nobel winner
[Guest]: Caribbean writer.
[Guest]: What's his name?
[Amit Varma]: Walcott.
[Guest]: Walcott.
[Guest]: Derek Walcott's Odysseus.
[Guest]: And, you know, it follows a perennial pattern.
[Guest]: There is a hero.
[Guest]: He is either given away or is parentless or nobody knows where he came from.
[Guest]: And then all of a sudden he's catapulted against a monstrous force which he takes on.
[Guest]: Then follows a very colorful, very lovely battle in which forces of good and forces
[Guest]: of evil come together and there's a headlong fight.
[Guest]: He manages to defeat.
[Guest]: Then he begins to rule.
[Guest]: But then it's the story begins to peter out.
[Guest]: And in the end, either he dies unknown, commits suicide or just vanishes right into the dusky
[Guest]: west.
[Guest]: You know, the same thing happens with Krishna.
[Guest]: Starts as Krishna, then becomes, you know, goes to Mathura, challenges Kansa.
[Guest]: Then he becomes the king of Dwarika, gets involved in getting the republics together.
[Guest]: Then comes the Mahabharata battle in which he, you know, like a writer, gets the ringside
[Guest]: seat driving the chariot of the one who he wants to be victorious.
[Guest]: And then after the battle, he takes, you know, the Pandavas go back to the mountains in Penance
[Guest]: and Kisi aur ko, third, fourth cousin, Bakal, one of my family cousins, it's a family idiot
[Guest]: who always inherits all in these epics.
[Guest]: So kisi family idiot ko, Janmeja ko pakda ke.
[Guest]: Then they all go to Himalaya.
[Guest]: Krishna comes back quite spent to Dwarika and then goes and rests in the forest and
[Guest]: some Vyat comes and kills him, thinking that he is a deer.
[Guest]: And so, you know, Mahabharat ends.
[Guest]: In Ramayana also, you know, again Ram is born and then the exile and the, you know, Ravan,
[Guest]: Ram, Ravan, Yuddha and everything.
[Guest]: Eventually he comes back, he loses Sita.
[Guest]: Then he, towards the end of his days, he's very popular, but he's also a very lonely
[Guest]: man.
[Guest]: He says, when he's seeing some photograph, old paintings, he says, tehi no devasahagata,
[Guest]: those days are over.
[Guest]: And then in the end, they say that he goes into a cave to pray.
[Guest]: Lakshman stands outside and death comes for him.
[Guest]: Lakshman says, take me instead.
[Guest]: So he loses Lakshman and when Ram hears that Lakshman is no more, he drowns himself.
[Guest]: So that's the end of another hero.
[Guest]: So you go to any big major epic, you find this is the cycle that happens.
[Guest]: So these folktales are also like that, they're giving children the messages and, you know,
[Guest]: one story that, one of the stories that I've done is about this daughter-in-law who has
[Guest]: a very cruel mother-in-law, as always in folktales, and she loves bitter gourd.
[Guest]: The mother-in-law cooks bitter gourd, but wouldn't give her share.
[Guest]: She goes out somewhere and tells her to fetch some water.
[Guest]: So this girl very cleverly steals a lot of rice and bitter gourd vegetable, takes it
[Guest]: in her ghada and goes and sits in the temple and gobbles it up quickly and then washes
[Guest]: the ghada and brings water and comes home.
[Guest]: The goddess is so bewildered that instead of her abhay mudra, she puts her hand on her
[Guest]: nose signaling, you know, utter amazement.
[Guest]: And then in the evening, the priest raises a big halda and says, you know, the goddess
[Guest]: is angry, she has changed her posture.
[Guest]: So everybody starts crying and saying, so the daughter-in-law says, you all go home,
[Guest]: let me, leave me with the goddess and I'll propitiate her.
[Guest]: So they all leave her alone knowing that it is full of tigers and things.
[Guest]: They say, bahu hi toh hai, she can cope for herself.
[Guest]: So she locks herself in and then she goes to the goddess and she says, look, you are
[Guest]: a woman, I am a woman, you know hunger and I know hunger and we both know deprivation.
[Guest]: So don't you dare put your nose, hand on your nose to signal anger or amazement.
[Guest]: You know very well what I am about.
[Guest]: So the goddess's hand comes back and so she goes home and goes to sleep in the morning
[Guest]: when the priest goes, everything is fine, everybody is very happy.
[Guest]: So it's a small story.
[Amit Varma]: What an amazing story.
[Guest]: It's an amazing story and I found the outlines of this in some old folktale.
[Guest]: So there were lots of such things happening.
[Guest]: So I was delighted when I read Peggy's book and I told her, you just caught me at the
[Guest]: right time.
[Amit Varma]: Peggy was on my show also, we did a long episode together.
[Guest]: What a wonderful woman.
[Amit Varma]: Just continuing on the thread about languages being a khichdi, one of the things I discovered
[Amit Varma]: from a book and everyone should really read it, is that Sanskrit is also such a khichdi.
[Amit Varma]: That it's not some pure thing which came down when the urns came, but you know, like the
[Amit Varma]: retroflex sounds, the duh and the tuh of daat, you know, is a local influence.
[Guest]: I'm writing a small column for our English and Hindi papers on food and the history of
[Guest]: food.
[Guest]: I mean, a lot of food which is served to the gods in the Vedic and the Sanatani rituals
[Guest]: has come from drabids or come from outside.
[Guest]: The word for banana in Sanskrit has come from other Caribbean islands, you know, not Caribbean,
[Guest]: but the southeastern islands.
[Guest]: And likewise, so many rituals have come from other.
[Guest]: So Sanskrit is again a hybrid, Sanskrit is a hybridized.
[Guest]: And then let's not forget that after Sanskrit was petering out, then Abhrinj and Prakrit
[Guest]: took its place.
[Guest]: So the Hindi and the dialects that we have in the north today are all children of Prakrit
[Guest]: and Abhrinj, not Sanskrit.
[Guest]: So Sanskrit is a hybrid, it has been distilled twice and then come to us and it has enriched
[Guest]: Hindi.
[Guest]: So, you know, how can you purify Hindi?
[Guest]: How can you say shuddhi karan kare?
[Amit Varma]: So my final question about language before we move on to so many other things I want
[Amit Varma]: to discuss, my final question about language comes from food, like you made that digression
[Amit Varma]: to food.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll take you up on that.
[Amit Varma]: There was an episode I did with the food writer Vikram Doctor called the Indianness of Indian
[Amit Varma]: food with the argument was most of our food has come from outside and there's hardly anything
[Amit Varma]: which is here.
[Amit Varma]: But there he spoke about the Cavendish banana.
[Amit Varma]: And the story of the Cavendish banana is this, that there was a banana that was made here
[Amit Varma]: and it got exported in the sense, you know, it went all over the world.
[Amit Varma]: And then it was mass produced in the US and South America and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And then it came back to India.
[Amit Varma]: And it happens to be a banana, which in terms of economics, it works out really well.
[Amit Varma]: In terms of preservation, it doesn't rot so easily, it's great.
[Amit Varma]: And now what is happening here is that the Cavendish banana is gradually killing off
[Amit Varma]: all the local forms of bananas, because this homogenization is happening because of that.
[Amit Varma]: Now, my question about related question about languages, that is that a danger?
[Amit Varma]: Because number one, and I'll give both points of view, and I'll see where you kind of stand
[Amit Varma]: on that.
[Amit Varma]: When number one, some would argue that everyone's trying to learn English in our small towns,
[Amit Varma]: because there is this hierarchy of languages.
[Amit Varma]: And just in a functional sense, it makes rational sense for parents to send their kids to an
[Amit Varma]: English medium school, and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And that becomes a worry that are you going to lose your local languages.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, what is also happening is that in our culture through other ways,
[Amit Varma]: whether it is Tiktok before Tiktok was banned, or whether it is in the new kind of lingo,
[Amit Varma]: which keeps coming up, you know, the language is evolving to assimilate everything in the
[Amit Varma]: diversity remains like you gave a great example of the, you know, the little ditty, Chaurasi
[Amit Varma]: ki phool, 32 ki mala, buri nazar wale, tera mukala, which is such a creative use.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, to take that forward, I coined one for you in your honor, Hindi ka khana,
[Amit Varma]: English ka paani.
[Amit Varma]: Mrinal ji, aap yahaan aaye bahut meharbani.
[Amit Varma]: But, but you get my drift.
[Amit Varma]: So my senses, I'm actually more optimistic, because I think language is the ultimate expression
[Amit Varma]: of liberalism.
[Amit Varma]: It takes in influences from everywhere, and they all coexist together.
[Amit Varma]: But there is a homogenization danger that that language based racism is still very real,
[Amit Varma]: that people are, you know, still flocking to learn English.
[Amit Varma]: And even within languages, like my friends worry about Kannada that my dialect will get
[Amit Varma]: wiped out, the mainstream will remain, those kind of worries are there.
[Amit Varma]: So what is your sense of all this?
[Guest]: I find languages evolve all the time.
[Guest]: The Hindi that I'm speaking is not the Hindi which my grandmother spoke, for example.
[Guest]: You know, the Hindi I was reading old Hindi books, Chandrakanta Santati and Kajarki Kothri
[Guest]: by Devki Nandan Khatri written in the 19th century.
[Guest]: The Hindi there is very different from the Hindi that we use.
[Guest]: And still it was a Kashi person who Kashi was the big seat of learning.
[Guest]: So that was the Hindi that they spoke then.
[Guest]: So I think people, the problem of hierarchies does not arise from language.
[Guest]: Language is only a mirror which reflects the hierarchies.
[Guest]: The hierarchies derive from elsewhere.
[Guest]: And I think the root cause of this is colonization.
[Guest]: You know, because colonization entered a country and people actually saw whole villages and
[Guest]: whole societies being erased, whole cultural icons and establishment being burnt overnight
[Guest]: and new things raised in their place.
[Guest]: The fear of the colonizer made them very, a very introverted to also liars, you know,
[Guest]: you would not open up easily.
[Guest]: So as a nation for hundreds of years, we have put a great sass on being quiet.
[Guest]: You know, he's a man, he's quiet and his still waters run deep.
[Guest]: You know, women don't know anything and therefore women, you know, women can't speak their mind.
[Guest]: When we were compiling a report on women in the unorganized sector for the government
[Guest]: in the late 1980s, we held some 300 meetings with women workers, you know, they were field
[Guest]: workers, farmyard workers, spinners, people who worked in the spinning and weaving industry,
[Guest]: women who worked as household maids.
[Guest]: And all of these people had their own stories about how they had been colonized to the extent
[Guest]: that they had no sense of self, they could not ask for better salaries, they could not
[Guest]: ask for salaries on par with men.
[Guest]: This included girls from Kerala who were specially called to Kolkata for shelling prawns, but
[Guest]: the dockyard workers said if they are paid on par with men, we will walk out, we will
[Guest]: not unload your ships.
[Guest]: So their, you know, wages were reduced.
[Guest]: So hierarchies are made by colonization.
[Guest]: Same thing happened with tea gardens.
[Guest]: You know, you brought labor from outside, but you paid women less and paid men more.
[Guest]: That way the men stayed.
[Guest]: The women still continued because the men usually drank up most of their salary anyhow.
[Guest]: But the reasoning you gave was that women take time off to feed their breast, feed their
[Guest]: children.
[Guest]: They have been there.
[Guest]: Peak working years are also the peak reproductive years and therefore women are not good.
[Guest]: In Sanskrit, there's a very good word for this in the Nyaya, yo, hum log ki, Nyaya mein
[Guest]: maan sab agra jo lagal learning hoti hai, to Nyaya mein ek word hai, Chakriya Nyaya.
[Guest]: Chakriya Nyaya means a way of thinking which locks you in a circle.
[Guest]: It's a self-fulfilling prophecy because you have convinced yourself that women are mindless
[Guest]: users of language and because women cannot know what they are thinking, therefore it's
[Guest]: no use talking to them of sense and sensible things and that locks them in a space which
[Guest]: after centuries they have come to accept, ki bhai hum to gareeb bhamani ba mahini hum
[Guest]: ka jaane, hum ka pata nahi, hum ka pata nahi, hum aar marat se poocho.
[Guest]: And marat will always be there lurking in the background.
[Guest]: So we chased them out.
[Guest]: Then they opened up and then we talked to them about many things and so a lot of things
[Guest]: came.
[Guest]: So I think the whole society suffers from this Chakriya Nyaya in a colonized country.
[Guest]: I've been to Bangladesh, I've been to Sri Lanka, I've been to Pakistan, I've been to
[Guest]: all the neighboring countries, Nepal, and I find everywhere all these ex-colonized countries
[Guest]: have the same attitudes, the same linguistic hierarchies.
[Guest]: In Pakistan they told me, ha mahin ji humare haan to urdu risale bohot bikhte hai aur isi
[Guest]: ki bohot zyada khareed hoti hai, par wo gareeb hai kyuki unko advertising nahi milti hai
[Guest]: aur urdu ke writers ko hum paisa kam de pate hain kyuki humare paas paisa nahi hain.
[Guest]: And then I asked them about the agencies, I said what about your wire agencies?
[Guest]: They said ki English ki wire agencies to sahab logon ke liye hain, to unko to paise mil jate
[Guest]: hai akhbaron se.
[Guest]: Humko Pathan bej ke apne paise vasool karane badte hain.
[Guest]: So that is the way it happens.
[Guest]: There was a conclave in Sri Lanka.
[Guest]: There also they said that Tamil and Sri Lankan native languages have a far bigger circulation
[Guest]: but they are paid much less, they are much less supported by the state and English is
[Guest]: the dominant language of discourse and then what also happens is then Chakri Niay again
[Guest]: operates across the seas.
[Guest]: So when journalists come visiting or are posted in India, the only journalists that they make
[Guest]: friends with and hang around with are the English language journalists because they
[Guest]: don't have to learn any Indian language.
[Guest]: You will rarely come across a foreign journalist who would pick up a local language.
[Guest]: Most of them just run on the surface and report on what is happening in Delhi or the state
[Guest]: capitals but rarely do they penetrate.
[Guest]: So they are locked in their own colonial Chakri Niay that these are developing countries.
[Guest]: These are the tier three countries which are coming up very hard and we must be very good
[Guest]: to them.
[Guest]: We must support them.
[Guest]: Oh, how lovely.
[Guest]: You also have English newspapers but they find us terribly provincial, our papers terribly
[Guest]: provincial but do read some Hindi papers, do read the Bengali papers and they have such
[Guest]: sparkling wit and such sparkling information, sedimented, put crudely, not really well edited
[Guest]: but it is all there.
[Guest]: So I think this breaking of this vicious circle is the only thing which will give a chance
[Guest]: for a co-mingling of languages.
[Guest]: I think the Mughals were very prudent.
[Guest]: They allowed languages to mingle.
[Guest]: They never interfered in this.
[Guest]: Arabic and Arabic was always the language of the conquerors.
[Guest]: Persian was the language of the courteous courtiers but the language with the common
[Guest]: folk spoke was Urdu Hindustani and it's called, you know, it was not a Shurfa logon ki bhaasa,
[Guest]: sirf Sharif logon ki bhaasa nahi thi, Urdu ae muhalla uss muhalle ki bhaasa thi, jo log
[Guest]: jaa, Mir says ki mere sher wo samajh sakta hai jo Jama masjid ki seediyon par betta hai.
[Guest]: So a common language which everybody understands and appreciates that is something which gets
[Guest]: created on its own because the push from the earth is so strong that it does not get noticed
[Guest]: is the Chakri in AI of the colonization.
[Amit Varma]: Before I go on to talking about women in India and I have so many questions about that, I
[Amit Varma]: want to pick up on that phrase colonial Chakri which is such a lovely phrase and I've spoken
[Amit Varma]: with different historians on my show about how when the British first came to India,
[Amit Varma]: their interlocutors were just the upper caste Brahmins that they encountered.
[Amit Varma]: So they were sold a version of the country as they tried to figure out what is this India,
[Amit Varma]: what is this society, they were sold a version of the country which was that very caste based
[Guest]: Brahminical version.
[Guest]: Should I tell you something here?
[Guest]: At the risk of stopping you, the reason why Bengali is a pejorative in northern belt,
[Guest]: you know, ye to bhookha Bengali hai, ye to Bengaliyon ki tarah jhoot bolta hai, is common
[Guest]: currency in villages in the north.
[Guest]: It is primarily because the first clerks that the British picked up who were reasonably
[Guest]: bilingual were in their conclave in Kolkata and then they invariably accompanied the British
[Guest]: revenue officials to get the lagaan and also to measure the lands and they would always
[Guest]: make money on that.
[Guest]: And so Bengali doctor, all the jhoola doctors, dubious doctors are called Bengali doctor.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Why not Punjabi doctor?
[Amit Varma]: And Punjabis have a trick or two of their skills also.
[Amit Varma]: I have to tell you that I'm half Bengali, half Punjabi.
[Guest]: So I hope nobody calls me a Bengali podcaster.
[Guest]: No, but I think these are all sedimented, you know, atavistic memories of having been
[Guest]: once upon a time, the word for Bengalis is babu.
[Guest]: Babu is literally in Persian means, ba means bad, bu means smell.
[Guest]: Bengalis to the, you know, Muslim nobility smelt foul because they ate fish and because
[Guest]: they put mustard oil in their hair.
[Guest]: And therefore, when the British asked, ye kaun hai, they said, this is babu.
[Guest]: So babu then became a generic term for clerks.
[Amit Varma]: And from that it became, you know, bada babu, chota babu ki.
[Amit Varma]: So fascinating, just seeing how language kind of evolves.
[Amit Varma]: So to continue with my question, the interlocutors are these Bengali babus and they are sold
[Amit Varma]: this particular brahmanical version of, you know, what India is like.
[Amit Varma]: And the irony is that then this narrative, this half-baked narrative then becomes a dominant
[Amit Varma]: narrative and we come to believe it ourselves in a sense.
[Guest]: No, but it becomes a dominant narrative primarily because the colonizers need a narrative which
[Guest]: justifies dominance and hierarchies.
[Guest]: And so by telling them the brahmanical version and describing the lower castes as untouchables
[Guest]: as bad, they were in a way opening up a chink through which they could justify their dominance
[Guest]: that we carry the white man's burden and we have to now, you know, semitize these people,
[Guest]: we have to teach them manners, we have to teach them to rise above untouchability and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: But the main, you know, the elephant in the room goes uncommented and unlooked at.
[Amit Varma]: But the question I was coming at was that you've also written about how so much of India
[Amit Varma]: is interpreted by people outside, that they will, you know, come from
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it comes to a second hand.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And do you think that that is there a danger?
[Amit Varma]: Do you think that, for example, when people fulminate among elite, against elites, for
[Amit Varma]: example, would you say that there is something to that as well?
[Amit Varma]: That the true diversity and the range of views of this country are kind of a little bit suppressed
[Guest]: by what dominant narratives
[Guest]: There is a paradox there, Amit, because what happens is when people fulminate against the
[Guest]: elites, it's a 50-50 thing, 50% fulminate because they would like to have themselves
[Guest]: that little bungalow in Lutyens' zone, that little membership of an elite club, you know,
[Guest]: golf club, country club, whatever.
[Guest]: And they fulminate for that, ki ye sab Lutyens' zone wale hain, ye sab Khan market gang hain,
[Guest]: ye sab ye hain.
[Guest]: 50% is justified, but half justified.
[Guest]: Because if it was so insufferable, why didn't you break out of it?
[Guest]: You know, when it became insufferable for me to teach English, I broke out of it and
[Guest]: joined a third rate Hindi language news agency, which gave me my breath back, you know.
[Guest]: So when people say ki I can't stand it, then my question or suggestion to them is then
[Guest]: why don't you just step out?
[Guest]: Why must you look for, you know, something which is, you know, in your bones is not going
[Guest]: to be available there?
[Guest]: This is not a panacea for your problems.
[Guest]: Now you live in your Lutyens' zone yourself.
[Guest]: So woh jumla bhi ab purana ho gaya, Lutyens' zone wale kahoge toh main aapko saare naam
[Guest]: fairies gina dunge ki Lutyens' zone mein aaj kal kaun rahta hai.
[Guest]: So woh jumla kaam nahin karega.
[Guest]: So I find that, you know, fulminating people leave me now unimpressed because I find most
[Guest]: of it comes out of, you know, feeling of jealousy.
[Guest]: Some of it comes out of a feeling of, you know, the inequalities which are irremovable.
[Guest]: Only two or three percent of it, like Peggy Mohan's, comes out of a genuine understanding
[Guest]: of the layered reality and the grey areas.
[Guest]: And I respect those people.
[Guest]: When they talk about these things, then I respect them.
[Guest]: But then again, the pity is that all these good reasoned and well thought out cogent
[Guest]: writings come to us in English.
[Guest]: They're not available to my readers in Hindi.
[Guest]: You know, then you again, another chakri niya ki Hindi walon ko kuch nahi aata hai.
[Guest]: Hindi ki akhbaron mein economic analysis nahi aati hai.
[Guest]: Do you know, in the late 19th century, the Hindi papers were the first to start writing
[Guest]: about bourses.
[Guest]: And in 1946, when Hindustan was launched, Daily Hindustan of Hindustan Times was launched,
[Guest]: it used to list London share markets on cotton, indigo, everything.
[Guest]: In India, because the Marwadi pedhiwalas and the Banaras Seths all read Hindi papers, they
[Guest]: did not read English papers.
[Guest]: So these were the selling points for their newspapers.
[Guest]: So I find that, you know, as I said, language has a way of erupting like a volcano.
[Guest]: You know, if you're not prepared for it, it will burn you, but the fact is, you have to
[Guest]: wait for it to cool and it brings fertile, alluvial soil, new patterns, reshapes the
[Guest]: continent.
[Guest]: And wait for that.
[Guest]: If you can't wait, then I'm very sorry.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the point you made about people fulminating because they themselves want to be the elites,
[Amit Varma]: you've got a lovely sentence in one of your pieces, which expresses this, where you write
[Amit Varma]: quote, suddenly I understood the real meaning of the much touted social justice revolution
[Amit Varma]: of India.
[Amit Varma]: It has not changed the ruling norms, only created autocrats from other castes, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote, in another context also.
[Amit Varma]: Now, earlier, we were talking about, you know, when we were speaking about language, we were
[Amit Varma]: speaking about women as well, and sort of their status, and this is something, a point
[Amit Varma]: that you've constantly made is that in any crisis in India, there's a secondary crisis
[Amit Varma]: beneath that, which is that of the women, like, when I was editor of Pragati, you'd
[Amit Varma]: very kindly written a piece on agriculture, where you said that you talk of farmers, but
[Amit Varma]: women farmers are even worse off.
[Amit Varma]: You use this lovely phrase where you were writing about Aishwarya Rai's wedding.
[Amit Varma]: And you used a phrase from Adrienne Rich, where you spoke about the kingdom of the father,
[Amit Varma]: how everything was dominated and said by the men, and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And there's another piece you wrote about men and women at social reunions, how they
[Amit Varma]: behave so differently.
[Amit Varma]: And I found that evocative.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll just read those little bits out where you speak.
[Amit Varma]: These thoughts crossed my mind when I recently attended a school reunion, where three generations
[Amit Varma]: of Indian men were present with their wives.
[Amit Varma]: As I watched, uniformly wealthy men pumped hands and thumbed shoulders and talked endlessly
[Amit Varma]: about money.
[Amit Varma]: Their women, however, eyed each other hesitantly for some time before sitting down in a semicircle
[Amit Varma]: like a bunch of smooth bananas.
[Amit Varma]: Things have not changed much in post-independence India.
[Amit Varma]: Girls continue to marry men who hold professions they have eyed enviously and are convinced
[Amit Varma]: they themselves can't have or can't manage on their own.
[Amit Varma]: At the reunion, some erstwhile stars from radical groups on campus who had married other
[Amit Varma]: ambitious young radicals now looked and talked like all other matronly wives, while their
[Amit Varma]: husbands had realized their early promise and had gone on to become major political
[Amit Varma]: leaders, media barons, star journalists.
[Amit Varma]: The wives had gone back to being wallflowers.
[Amit Varma]: None of them had demonstrated the courage to challenge the female deficient empires
[Amit Varma]: their husbands had created and led."
[Amit Varma]: And my question here is this that to anyone who takes some time to think about it is pretty
[Amit Varma]: obvious that this is a massive waste in India where you treat half your population as second
[Amit Varma]: class citizens.
[Amit Varma]: They are not empowered to reach their full potential, etc, etc, etc, etc.
[Amit Varma]: But one thought that often strikes me is that why aren't more women, for example, standing
[Amit Varma]: up and making that kind of noise, you know, is it the pervasive fear they might feel of
[Amit Varma]: immediate disapproval from the circles around them?
[Amit Varma]: Is it that this is a slow process and it is actually happening like when you look back
[Amit Varma]: through the arc of all your decades in public life, your decades observing all of this,
[Amit Varma]: do you feel more hopeful or do you feel that these problems are too deep?
[Amit Varma]: What is your sense of all this?
[Guest]: I am hopeful generally.
[Guest]: I find that we have come a long way from my grandmother's generation to my mother's generation
[Guest]: to mine and beyond me, my daughters, who are even more free in the real sense than I am.
[Guest]: Because as I told you, I am hardwired into certain habits and certain, you know, sudden
[Guest]: reactions.
[Guest]: But I think we have, things have been evolving.
[Guest]: What is happening is because of media, these ideas are being disseminated in a way they
[Guest]: earlier were not.
[Guest]: And so it is creating a lot of dissatisfied people, but without really telling them frankly
[Guest]: the price freedom comes with, I mean, even let's face it, even men have won their freedom
[Guest]: at a great price in the sense that almost always they are cut off from their progeny.
[Guest]: Mothers have a special access to children, they have a certain command over their children.
[Guest]: And if the mother dies and the father is old and lonely, then even if he stays with children
[Guest]: and they are kind to him, it's a very lonely life for him.
[Guest]: You know, my husband once said, when we go abroad, you immediately get absorbed in the
[Guest]: children's house and you start pottering about, I don't know what to do with myself.
[Guest]: So I said, go polish their silver and he said, kahan se shuru karu?
[Guest]: So I taught him how to, he said, you, you mean you've been doing it all these years?
[Guest]: I said, no, because I didn't use any silver.
[Guest]: The first chance I first did it on them, I said, you take the family's silver because
[Guest]: I can't be bothered about polishing it.
[Guest]: So I mean, these are little, you know, frivolous things, but I think there are multiple reasons
[Guest]: for this.
[Guest]: A, women, as I said, are locked up in that chakri space, that round space which locks
[Guest]: them out of reason and rational thinking.
[Guest]: B, the family structure is so based on exploiting women's labour and their child-rearing capacities
[Guest]: that people feel very threatened.
[Guest]: You must have read about the recent question which Sonia Gandhi raised in Parliament about
[Guest]: a CBSE book saying that children have to be disciplined by mothers who will obey their
[Guest]: husbands as their masters.
[Guest]: The modern feminist women with feminist ideas are not obeying their husbands, thereby setting
[Guest]: a bad example and then they can't expect disciplined attitudes from their children.
[Guest]: So that is the other circuit they have to break.
[Guest]: Third is the very real reason that there are simply no jobs for women once they have taken
[Guest]: a backseat for, say, 10 years, because that's the period from giving birth to bringing up
[Guest]: a child to regular school-going age.
[Guest]: If you have two children, it takes at least 10 years.
[Guest]: So you give birth to children at the age of 20 and they die at the age of 30.
[Guest]: Most of the good jobs have been taken up by men who were in your class and they have progressed
[Guest]: from here to there.
[Guest]: But for you, you start again A for Apple.
[Guest]: So a lot of women then compromise and take the easiest jobs to handle, they become school
[Guest]: teachers.
[Guest]: They've handled children, they're reasonably well-educated, they're intelligent, so they
[Guest]: become teachers.
[Guest]: But very few women have the courage left by then or the sense of self-worth to really
[Guest]: retrain themselves to redo their education, A, because a lot of them don't have the means,
[Guest]: B, because the husband and the families will not provide extra money for the wife educating
[Guest]: herself, and C, by the time she finishes her education, she'll be 15 years behind the rat
[Guest]: race.
[Guest]: So it is something very, very difficult and women are very pragmatic creatures.
[Guest]: They know the way the world functions.
[Guest]: So most of them say, they want to choose the easy way out.
[Guest]: A lot of women who are abused, I've talked to a lot of women and I say, tumne pehle pehle
[Guest]: jab shuru hua toh kyu nahi kaha?
[Guest]: And they say, I didn't want to create a ruffle and I didn't want to hurt my parents and I
[Guest]: didn't want to do this, I didn't want to do that.
[Guest]: But I said, when he hit you first, didn't you feel humiliated?
[Guest]: They said, I was so ashamed that I couldn't even bring myself to say it to anyone.
[Guest]: And then of course, he apologized.
[Guest]: You would be amazed at the kind of abuse, domestic abuse.
[Guest]: And when we were children, we were told ki tumhara ghar sabse surakshit jagah hai.
[Guest]: Now you are seeing evidence that home is one of the unsafest places for young girls and
[Guest]: for women.
[Guest]: Thanks to the media, it has come out.
[Guest]: But again, the media is working very fast and it guzzles news and it just churns it
[Guest]: out without really putting it in a context because most of the people in the media themselves
[Guest]: are very young.
[Guest]: So it's like a 14-year-old singing a thumri full of longing of an adult courtesan.
[Guest]: What does she knows about, you know, dahiya kahan gaye, ve log bridge ke basaiya.
[Guest]: When she sings that, what does she know of an aged Gopika longing for a Krishna who's
[Guest]: now gone to Dwarika.
[Guest]: So it is like that the media is unable to really, it reports, but it is unable to contextualize
[Guest]: the grief, the rage and the actual reasons.
[Guest]: And in the judiciary where all these cases go, you're well aware the kind of load that
[Guest]: exists and the kind of hearing that women get.
[Guest]: So when they feel that they're not going to get, the root is lack of justice.
[Guest]: You know, laws are made by men, laws are discussed by men, laws are exercised and applied by
[Guest]: men, laws are used to, you know, gauge or discuss a case in court and pronouncements
[Guest]: are made by judges, all of whom are uniformly, almost uniformly male.
[Guest]: So women also have this feeling ki jab sunwahi nahi hogi toh keh ke kya fayda.
[Guest]: You know, so you have to, there has to be multi, the first women who started reporting
[Guest]: were upper caste, upper class women who are well educated, who could, who had a voice
[Guest]: in their natal homes and who could not put up with this kind of unjust.
[Guest]: The first report about Indian divorces shows that the highest rate of divorce was among
[Guest]: Brahmin Maharashtrian women who also had a very high literacy rate.
[Guest]: So I think we have to be patient, we have to let things like language evolve, but things
[Guest]: are changing, they will change and if they change for better or worse will depend very
[Guest]: much on so many other factors which are not within our control, but they are changing,
[Guest]: they will change, but eventually it's the same cycle, you know, if they become, you
[Guest]: know, if they become heroes, will they behave any differently?
[Guest]: There's a beautiful story by Vijay Dandetha about, it's again based on a folk tale about
[Guest]: two women who are in love with each other and one of them is granted a boon and is able
[Guest]: to change her sex and become a male and she starts behaving like a husband.
[Guest]: So this other woman then curses her and says, keep become a female again, you know.
[Guest]: So I think you don't know, life is so full of paradoxes, you know, you very often become
[Guest]: that which you hate the most.
[Guest]: So you know, in the process of hating too much, that's why I find hatred is a very strong
[Guest]: emotion and one should be very, very wary of it.
[Guest]: One of the last two things, I'll finish this with my mother's advice to me.
[Guest]: She told me, you have all the qualities, but you still have a lot of anger.
[Guest]: She said, don't get angry, it's all natural.
[Guest]: Don't be so angry all the time.
[Guest]: Everybody is tied again the Chakri circle of their given temperament.
[Guest]: So they are not really largely to be blamed.
[Guest]: There are circumstances in which people behave in a certain way.
[Guest]: The other thing she said, never be a collector of things, give away all you can by the time
[Guest]: your end comes, and she said, you will feel so free, never accumulate.
[Guest]: Just give away whatever you can keep the least minimum with you.
[Guest]: And you'll feel very light.
[Guest]: And that I can do easily.
[Guest]: That that is easy.
[Guest]: But conquering anger since then has been a long battle with myself.
[Guest]: And I think I'm a shade better than I was.
[Amit Varma]: Very wise words by your mother.
[Amit Varma]: And also when you said that don't become what you hate, I thought of how, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: current dispensation in charge, people like Modi and Jaitley were, you know, opposing
[Amit Varma]: the emergency running from it.
[Amit Varma]: And you'd think the lesson they learned from it is that autocracy is bad, oppression is
[Amit Varma]: bad.
[Guest]: But look what happened.
[Guest]: I've seen this repeat so many times, I mean, even the Janata Party, when it came to power,
[Guest]: I was one of the people who sang Hosannas, and you know, I was young in my 30s.
[Guest]: And I thought, you know, you know, a revolution will come.
[Guest]: But then revolution also, again, the Chakri, you know, the pattern of civilizations, you
[Guest]: know, JP rose like a Colossus, like a hero, helped win the battle, started the Nav Nirmal
[Guest]: movement, helped overcome the battle, and then gave the, you know, Raj Mukund to unsuitable
[Guest]: people.
[Guest]: And we were saddled with a chain of prime ministers who just couldn't cope.
[Guest]: And so that particular thing petered out, and eventually, VP Singh retired into the
[Guest]: banwas, Lalu Yadav is sick and went to jail.
[Guest]: You know, all the big promising names and leaders who came out of that movement.
[Guest]: Chandrashekhar died, a much vilified man, though he was a brilliant, brilliant man.
[Guest]: So history, you know, makes you a hero for a while.
[Guest]: And once you've done your job, then history just pushes you aside.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes Lord Acton said power corrupts, absolute power corrupts, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you mentioned divorce rates, I remember many years back, a decade and a
[Amit Varma]: half back, I got trolled a lot, when I wrote this piece arguing that one of the best signs
[Amit Varma]: of India's social progress was rising divorce rates.
[Amit Varma]: And my argument was a damn good thing.
[Amit Varma]: Because if divorce rates rise, that means women are getting empowered.
[Amit Varma]: I know we are short of time, you promised me two hours to begin with, and we've gone
[Amit Varma]: well over and I'm very grateful.
[Amit Varma]: But some final questions on the media, because in troubled times, when politics goes in these
[Amit Varma]: kind of directions, we look at the media as a savior, in a sense, you know, that old cliche
[Amit Varma]: goes about how the job of a journalist is to, you know, speak truth to power to comfort
[Amit Varma]: the afflicted and afflict the comfortable as it were.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I'm very curious, and I would actually love to spend a few hours discussing this.
[Amit Varma]: But in vernacular media, like I think all of us make sense of the world by joining dots,
[Amit Varma]: we have different dots, we join them, we have a picture of the world.
[Amit Varma]: And I feel that people who read in English are hobbled in the sense that they have a
[Amit Varma]: limited number of dots if they're trying to paint a picture of India.
[Amit Varma]: And people who read in vernacular languages will have a completely separate set of dots,
[Amit Varma]: which are not necessarily better, they're just different.
[Amit Varma]: In your experience of vernacular media, in what ways was it different from the English
[Amit Varma]: media?
[Amit Varma]: And when you went in, I mean, you were an editor for so long of Hindustan and so on,
[Amit Varma]: what sort of journalistic vision and ethic did you craft for yourself or take into the
[Amit Varma]: project when you kind of went in?
[Guest]: I have always been an exception.
[Guest]: I have never unfortunately become the rule.
[Guest]: When I became an editor, I was in my early 40s, and I became an editor of a women's magazine
[Guest]: in Hindi.
[Guest]: The expectation was that it would be a counterpart of Femina.
[Guest]: And I told them, I said, I'm sorry, I'm not kitted out to cope with beauty pageants and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: I've lived in America, I know how frivolous they are.
[Guest]: And therefore, it will be a Vicharsheel Mahilaon ki Vishisht Patrika.
[Guest]: So they said, this is too thick in Hindi.
[Guest]: So I said, do you read any Hindi?
[Guest]: They said, no.
[Guest]: So I said, then who are you to judge Hindi?
[Guest]: Anyway, so it got going because I had good backing and they trusted me to their great
[Guest]: credit and ran for four years.
[Guest]: But then I realized that the marketing staff was not convinced.
[Guest]: And a lot of them had very severe allergic reactions to the kind of ideas that this magazine
[Guest]: was coming out with.
[Guest]: In fact, one of them told me that every month when Vama comes to our house, I have a fight
[Guest]: with my wife.
[Guest]: That day she is very excited that Vama has written this.
[Guest]: So he said, you are getting fights in every house.
[Guest]: Similarly, there was a program at this almost at the same time that I was doing for Manju
[Guest]: and Jyotsingh and it was called, it was based on laws and actual cases where women had fought
[Guest]: back.
[Guest]: Then in the end, I came on and explained the law that had helped women and laid down some
[Guest]: warnings for women about, you know, using things just so.
[Guest]: So I had gone to a wedding and a lot of people said, it is very good, we are learning a lot
[Guest]: from this.
[Guest]: Then one woman came to me.
[Guest]: She said, you tell them to do it either late at night or in the afternoon when men are
[Guest]: not at home.
[Guest]: She said, it is time to eat and we are always late to serve food and then these people get
[Guest]: angry that you, that Adhikar, that was his name, Adhikar, that you have gone to see Adhikar
[Guest]: again.
[Guest]: And there is a 40-minute show and then you are late to serve food.
[Guest]: So you tell them.
[Guest]: So then I realized suddenly, you know, that women do not even have this time, that time.
[Guest]: This is 80s.
[Guest]: Tab se toh ab tak 30 saal guzar gaye hain, but, you know, they were not, and the show
[Guest]: itself was quite successful, but, you know, people had strong misgivings about it.
[Guest]: So Vama, I left after four years and then I joined Star TV for a while.
[Guest]: I was with NDTV.
[Guest]: I helped them set up their Hindi channel.
[Guest]: But I realized that print media was not very welcoming of new ideas, Hindi mein.
[Guest]: They had certain set images for Hindi editorial and Hindi writing and they were happy if it
[Guest]: fulfilled those.
[Guest]: But if somebody tried to bring in new ideas, they were very suspicious, Hindi mein ye nahi
[Guest]: chalega.
[Guest]: And this came from people who hardly ever read anything, let alone a newspaper, hardly
[Guest]: ever read anything, but they had been convinced.
[Guest]: And then you talk to advertisers and ad makers when I used to go to Bombay to shoot Adhikar,
[Guest]: I met a lot of ad agency people, a lot of them are family friends.
[Guest]: And they all said ki look, Hindi mein pul nahi hai, toh ab agar batao humein caron ki
[Guest]: bigyaapan nahi de sakte hain tumhare usmein.
[Guest]: Hindi walas don't buy cars.
[Guest]: Hindi walas don't buy expensive watches.
[Guest]: Hindi walas don't buy expensive things.
[Guest]: So all you get is, you know, underwear, banyan and, you know, children's washing powder and
[Guest]: detergents and stuff like that.
[Guest]: So this was the dominant discourse in all wings that really funded the media.
[Guest]: So that affected the morale of the Hindi papers.
[Guest]: When I took over Hindustan, it was called Lottery walon ka paper, its big selling point
[Guest]: was ki usmein rooz lottery ke poore bigyaapan chhapte the, aur saari lotteryon ke results
[Guest]: chhapte the.
[Guest]: So lottery ke jo passionate jowari log the, wo isko zarur kharite the.
[Guest]: Isi tarah Sandhya Times tha, wo uska big selling point was ki it was very popular among three-wheeler
[Guest]: drivers.
[Guest]: So three-wheelers, shaam ki waqt unko thoda time hota tha, before the office hour, chaar
[Guest]: bhaji unko mil jata tha, chaar se paanch ki beech mein unko shehar ki khabar mil jati
[Guest]: thi.
[Guest]: So I felt that these papers were being brought out for the wrong reasons.
[Guest]: The audience was changing.
[Guest]: And I told them, you'll lose your audience to English papers very soon.
[Guest]: And they said, we'd be very happy.
[Guest]: So I said, no.
[Guest]: But the fact is that 90% of the children who are being educated in government schools are
[Guest]: being educated in their mother tongue, which is Hindi, in the Hindi belt.
[Guest]: So the first generation literates and the second generation literates have to have access
[Guest]: to Hindi to be able to understand what is going on, because government's influence
[Guest]: on their lives is far deeper than its influence on you.
[Guest]: Aap toh jo Angrezi ka akhbar khari toh aapki company account se 90% log ka jata hai, unko
[Guest]: pata bhi nahi kiska cover price kya hai.
[Guest]: Hindi wala ek ek paisa jama karke, zyadata stall buying hoti hindi akhbaron ki, because
[Guest]: they want to compare and see kis mein kitni news hai, kis mein kitni humare alaake ki
[Guest]: kitni news hai.
[Guest]: So I said, they are very watchful buyers.
[Guest]: So you have to give them what.
[Guest]: So gradually over a period of 20 years, I pushed and I pushed and I pushed and finally
[Guest]: when it came, there was no stopping.
[Guest]: Of course, other houses which had only Hindi newspapers did much better, Bhaskar for example
[Guest]: or Dainik Jagra, they only had Hindi newspapers.
[Guest]: But then in the process, what has been also happening is they have all started digital
[Guest]: portals which have far more readership and much more advertising available to them now.
[Guest]: And so the editorial bureaus have been paired almost completely.
[Guest]: Now bureaus were where the seasoned journalists sat who had been holding certain beats for
[Guest]: years and years, who had right contacts, who understood the matter, who had seen governments
[Guest]: come and go and you could sit and discuss with them, clarify your own thoughts.
[Guest]: Now the bureaus have all ended one by one, the poor people in the bureaus have all become
[Guest]: unemployed.
[Guest]: And for the new boys who have come, it is excitement that there should be sex in everything.
[Guest]: This is not sexy news, I started listening to this new thing in the 90s, this news has
[Guest]: to be sexy.
[Guest]: So the attitude that changed, the media people accepted the pressure that was on them.
[Guest]: So mujhe laga ki Hindi mein yeh kamzori hai because it has been colonized by various hordes
[Guest]: for so long, it has lost its own power of discrimination and a respect for the language
[Guest]: that it is writing in.
[Guest]: And unless that comes, you know, there was a period when we had Hindi editors who were
[Guest]: also well-known writers, poets, and also thinkers, people like Dharmir Bharti, people like Kamleshwar,
[Guest]: people like Agye, people like Raghuveer Sahar, people like Shrikant Verma.
[Guest]: They were all highly educated, extremely well-versed, Prabhas Joshi, Rajendra Mathur, these are
[Guest]: people who were, you know, they were polyglots and they read so much and they knew so many
[Guest]: languages and they were very discriminating, you know, assessors of political situations.
[Guest]: But after TV caught on, the younger people started moving from journalism schools to
[Guest]: TV.
[Guest]: And TV mein bhi, first they moved to English, then very grudgingly they were asked to do
[Guest]: two roles, ki bhai Hindi mein bhi kuch kar dena.
[Guest]: That was when I was doing NDTV.
[Guest]: And then after that, when the big breakthrough for Hindi came with Atal Bihari Vajpayee's
[Guest]: government, then there was a big bhakdar for Hindi.
[Guest]: But then they discovered that schools of journalism was throwing out journalists who were proficient
[Guest]: only in English.
[Guest]: So then, you know, schools of journalism like Makhanlal Chaturvedi Patarkarita Sansthan
[Guest]: came up, but they were soon peopled by government-appointed nominees with certain ideological biases.
[Guest]: So you knew ki waha se jo bhi niklenge wo sabahat ke niklenge.
[Guest]: Hindi has had that, as I said even earlier, the unfortunate thing is that it is politically
[Guest]: an extremely powerful language and that has inhibited it from really developing as a language
[Guest]: and as a thinking man's language.
[Guest]: So whatever you think, sooner or later, your chakri political vintage locks it in.
[Guest]: And then, you know, if you are so-and-so, then you lean right.
[Guest]: If you are so-and-so, you lean left.
[Guest]: And that becomes its self-fulfilling destiny, which is sad.
[Guest]: So Hindi is immensely powerful, but the power can be misused.
[Guest]: I don't, I don't feel very happy at the power Hindi has got because now it has become a
[Guest]: clone of what it used to whine and complain about.
[Guest]: You know, you see Hindi editors, the way they go groveling and they, hum toh Switzerland
[Guest]: ke jaa rahe hain, apni bibi aur bachchon ko le karke, jayiye saah, jayiye, bahut achchi
[Guest]: baat hai.
[Guest]: Toh, you know, this is not what, you know, journalism should be about.
[Guest]: This is what not life is about.
[Guest]: And but this is happening and this is life.
[Guest]: And this happens, as my mother said, ki subhaagat vibhashta hai.
[Guest]: So you accept it as it is.
[Amit Varma]: So two final questions and we'll end it there.
[Amit Varma]: And this question is taking off from what you just said that this is not what journalism
[Amit Varma]: is.
[Amit Varma]: Toh mujhe lagta hai ki journalism mein, on the one hand, there is the idealism, that
[Amit Varma]: idealism and the sense of what journalism can be, that, you know, we are the first draft
[Amit Varma]: of history, we speak truth to power and all that, woh apni jaga hai.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, when you look at the reality, you also see that journalism is a
[Amit Varma]: business.
[Amit Varma]: There's a profit and loss statement to look at, that a lot of journalism across the country
[Amit Varma]: actually runs on government advertising, government advertising goes, aap khatam ho gaye.
[Amit Varma]: And even where it doesn't, there is still a lot of pressure that can be put by the people
[Amit Varma]: in power, because there'll be houses which will have a, you know, a big media publication,
[Amit Varma]: but they will also have a chemical factory, wahan pe income tax rate ho sakta hai.
[Amit Varma]: Toh all of these pressures are there.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you feel about this?
[Amit Varma]: Do you feel that media will eventually succumb to this?
[Amit Varma]: Or do you feel, as I'm beginning to feel a little bit, that there is hope in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that technology empowers individuals, and even small outfits, people like Scroll and
[Guest]: News Laundry and so on?
[Guest]: I agree with you.
[Guest]: I agree with you, because this particular kind of journalism has reached its nadir.
[Guest]: It cannot go down any further.
[Guest]: And it began happening when in the 1990s, late 1990s, English mein, the editors began
[Guest]: buying equity or being given equity in the papers, or taking the paper as owners.
[Guest]: And usi waqt maine kaha tha, ki yeh theek nahi hai.
[Guest]: My father used to say, ghoda ghas dosti karega, toh khayega kya.
[Guest]: You know, so if you become editor and owner together, your primary loyalty towards your
[Guest]: readership or your listeners gets diluted, because then you think of the bottom line
[Guest]: and the shareholders who have invested in your company.
[Guest]: And this is not good.
[Guest]: There were strong editors, they were taking care of the papers or the channels, which
[Guest]: is true.
[Guest]: But then comes a point where you have to, if you want to, once you enter that particular
[Guest]: race, you know, it's necessary to have a firewall around the editorial, no matter who the owner
[Guest]: is.
[Guest]: And the owner should never be the editor.
[Guest]: And the editor should never dream of becoming the owner.
[Guest]: Because the two things just don't mesh.
[Guest]: So if you are a really good editor, you promise the owner, I'll give you a first-rate newspaper.
[Guest]: I will deliver so many copies and I will give you this, this, this.
[Guest]: But in turn, don't you ever interfere in my domain.
[Guest]: And don't you ever question my, you know, the same thing that Ganga told Shantanu, ki
[Guest]: agar tumne jo main kar rahi hoon, main kalyad ke liye kar rahi hoon, par agar tumne sawal
[Guest]: uthaya, toh main chhod ke chali jaunge.
[Guest]: And this is what, you know, the editors don't do.
[Guest]: They just cling on and on and on.
[Guest]: Hindi mein editors hain, arre bhaiya tum abhi bhi bahi hoon, Manal ji aapne badhi jaldi
[Guest]: chhod diya, nahi chhoda bhaiya, 30 saal kaam kiya main na maha par.
[Guest]: Nahi nahi, aapko nahi chhodna chahiye, Hindi ke din phir gaye hain, Hindi mein kya kya
[Guest]: ho raha hain.
[Guest]: As in main dekh rahi hoon kya ho raha hain.
[Guest]: You know, and I'm sad about it and I'm really ashamed about it.
[Guest]: I don't write for any Hindi paper except the one that I'm advising.
[Guest]: But I don't write for Hindi papers because the highest selling Hindi papers are now,
[Guest]: you know, making me feel very embarrassed looking at them.
[Guest]: I buy them as a matter of course.
[Guest]: But it makes me very embarrassed about, you know, the kind of drivel that goes into them.
[Guest]: So, I think the new technology may once again empower individuals.
[Guest]: But then I again feel that portals, individual portals will find it hard to sustain themselves
[Guest]: because the biggest chunk of revenues is still going to the major international portals.
[Guest]: They are the ones who are picking up.
[Guest]: They are the ones who are giving you the anti-aircraft gun lander.
[Guest]: So long as that particular thing is available with them, it's difficult for portals to survive.
[Guest]: Individuals, yes, but then I think the way technology is going, maybe it will become
[Guest]: possible like self-publishing who have a completely self-sustaining thing.
[Guest]: But then in that case, you have to be legally very savvy because no government likes, you
[Guest]: know, complete truth.
[Guest]: And so therefore, every successive government, not just this one, every government will bring
[Guest]: in laws to make it difficult to tell the truth and nothing but the truth.
[Guest]: So I think, let's see how this pans out.
[Amit Varma]: So, my final question is based on an observation Jonathan Haidt had pointed out recently that
[Amit Varma]: even though today's generation has the whole world of knowledge at its disposal, like hamare
[Amit Varma]: time mein jo bhi kitabe mil jate the, we were glad to read it, but today all of history
[Amit Varma]: is open to you, all of literature is open to you, but most people are consuming what
[Amit Varma]: was produced in the last three days.
[Amit Varma]: Most content that is consumed was produced in the last three days.
[Amit Varma]: And there is thus a danger here that people today, young people today are not getting
[Amit Varma]: enough of that broad perspective, which can help them get a little bit of that sense of
[Amit Varma]: how to navigate the world.
[Amit Varma]: So as someone who's older than India, you know, what advice would you give to the young
[Amit Varma]: listeners of the show, to young people today who are listening to this?
[Amit Varma]: What advice would you give them on how to live their lives?
[Guest]: I would say that, A, they must learn as many languages as they can.
[Guest]: They open the portals to so many wonderful worlds.
[Guest]: And B, the attention span, they have to like, they do yoga to stay fit.
[Guest]: They have to do some mental yoga to increase their attention span.
[Guest]: Just as yogic breathing increases your breath, you can increase your attention span.
[Guest]: When that happens, you can still watch your digital news, but you can also then begin
[Guest]: reading in the true sense.
[Guest]: Read digitally.
[Guest]: There is now no harm.
[Guest]: You read on Kindle, whether you read it in books, whatever you are comfortable with.
[Guest]: But do read and then pause to think.
[Guest]: I'm a great Facebook opponent.
[Guest]: I have never been on Facebook, despite many pressures, because I find that Facebook, for
[Guest]: heaven's sake, was invented by a Howard Sofmo, you know, who wanted all the attention and
[Guest]: who wanted data and who wanted, you know, to again create another Chakri area in which
[Guest]: people were locked and their own walls then became their worlds.
[Guest]: And we have to knock that down.
[Guest]: We have to detox ourselves and we have to stop thinking so narrowly in the constricted
[Guest]: manner in which we have to make human friends, you know, not Facebook friends.
[Guest]: Those friendships are not really friendships.
[Guest]: You just want clicks of likes and dislikes.
[Guest]: You have to rise above that.
[Guest]: You have to think, I'm not going to bother about being liked or not liked.
[Guest]: I mean, when my generation rebelled against so many institutions, at one point you said,
[Guest]: yaar, koi farak nahi padta hai, jute maane toh maane toh, hum toh karenge, you know.
[Guest]: So you have come to a point where you have to do that, ki Facebook ke friends root chahe
[Guest]: toh root chahe, ek million ki following chali chahe toh chali chahe, lekin hum toh gyaan
[Guest]: badhaenge, apna gyaan badhaenge.
[Guest]: So that is really real growth.
[Guest]: This is stunting your growth.
[Guest]: This is making you into intellectual bonsais.
[Guest]: The nerds are intellectual bonsais, cut off from fresh air, cut off from everything.
[Guest]: And unfortunately, COVID has exacerbated that.
[Guest]: I think we have to make a conscious effort, even if it kills us, to break out of this,
[Guest]: to detox ourselves and let these, you know, intoxicating portals carry on without us.
[Guest]: We are not essential to them.
[Guest]: They are just using us for our data.
[Guest]: You are better than your data.
[Guest]: You are not what your data is.
[Guest]: You know, that data which the companies use is, you know, kind of excreta.
[Guest]: You are better than your data.
[Guest]: You have to be better than your data.
[Guest]: And you have to let that part of you grow, which is not data.
[Amit Varma]: That's such a beautiful line.
[Amit Varma]: You are better than your data.
[Amit Varma]: Sirf ek cheez, ma'am, I point out karunga ki aap keh rahe the short attention span.
[Amit Varma]: We are saying this in the third hour, we've reached the third hour of the show.
[Amit Varma]: So anyone who is listening to this clearly doesn't quite have that problem, but it's
[Amit Varma]: great advice.
[Amit Varma]: And thank you so much for coming on my show.
[Guest]: It's a great honor for me.
[Guest]: It's great talking to you.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, hop on over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline and pick up everything you can get by Mrinal Pandey, such an insightful writer.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Mrinalji on Twitter at MrinalPandey1.
[Amit Varma]: And you can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.